<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
The second disk in this set was damaged - the files could not be opened or transferred  to our hard drive. We'll need a replacement (files 121 - 240).

Otherwise, the files on the other two discs produced accurate text files. <pb n="1"/>
FR!OM THE COUNTRY.
.-- CH APTER I.
it   week   The splendour of the
:denly, and a strong west wind
the salt of the sea from whence
the country in blustering and
-It was rain laden too, and in a
ithe little world round and about
iworld which had been so golden
c.rly a short time before, wore a
W beaten look.
- was fairly sheltered, for the road
" ,A4d the few houses which formed
i, street seemed to have grown
realising their isolation and the
always declared that it was like
: h*use  to pass through the village,
*i  had quaint ideas-ideas that were
l  im.  For instance, when all the rest
community garbed itself in a respect-
_ t speed the passing of the summer and



<pb n="2"/>
2             A YOUNG MAN
meet the coming of the western wind, Patricia would
steal out of the house whenever she could find an
opportunity and would spend hours tramping the
country-side, tempest tossed and rain drenched but
utterly impervious to damp or discomfort, only
conscious of an irrepressible delight which the battle
with the strong wind brought her. The wildness of
the storm said so much to Patricia.
It might be safely asserted that few other persons
in and about Winchbourne regarded the breaking
up of the late pleasant weather with amiability; in
fact, it was generally conceded that nothing could
have been more unfortunate, or ill-timed, than the
coming of the wind and the rain at this particular
moment. From afar, where she laughed aloud in
mischievous glee, the girl had watched each day the
hopeless attempts made to decorate the village in
honour of the bride and bridegroom who were due
to return to Winchbourne Court from their honey-
moon now almost directly.
If the character of their future was to be expressed
in untoward signs and gloomy skies, then apparently
there was to be singularly little joy in store for Sir
Francis and Lady Amelia Heatherington. For the
nearer the day drew on which they were to arrive
from their sojourn in Italy, the greyer and the colder
grew the country to which they were coming (even
to Patricia's ears there seemed to be a cry of despair
in the shrill, keen wind), and as fast as willing hands
put up the archway, just outside the old, old church,
and tried to festoon the erection with red bunting,
and gay banners, so' did the rain beat upon these
things, and the fierce wind rend and destroy them.



<pb n="3"/>
L FROM THE COUNTRY.                    3
ieally Patricia's sister who settled the
he decorations.
they must be done away with.    It's
of time and money," Sheila Prentice
cold decisive way to the rector and Mrs.
B   I am quite sure that the sooner Frank
i  are through with the long drive from
lt the Court in this detestable weather
y will be pleased.  It would not be
eable for them to be smothered in wet
is what must be expected if this
airhway is persisted in."
H o*und an early opportunity for retiring
troversy. He knew that he would hear
r on, and Mrs. Bartingale did not dis-
S:he was more than usually exasperated,
Miss Prentice's interference loudly.
*iid' the rector's wife, "Sheila has
y unbearable.  Really, she presumes
4And as for Patricia, she is as bad
a;y, so flippant and hoydenish.  Poor
had little reason to be grateful to you
ded her into allowing Patricia to go to
girl has been quite different ever since.
approved, as you know, of these foreign
ldyr. Patricia could have had all the
lion she wanted here. Thank God!
'never gone out of my sight! "
r mingled a fair share of discretion with
but something moved him to say now
I! I think you are a little hard on Patsy.
simply high-spirited and young, and life



<pb n="4"/>
4              A YOUNG MAN
is beautiful to her. I should be sorry to think her
studies in Germany had harmed her in any way.
As to Sheila, I grant you she is less easy to deal with,
but I do not think she means to annoy you."
Patricia had been home from Leipsic nearly a year
when the village was making such futile attempts to
show decorative expression of good wishes to the
home-coming of the husband and wife who were the
"big" people of the neighbourhood. Of course,
Mrs. Prentice had her own position, unassailable in a
sense, but she lacked that which Sir Francis possessed
in such abundance-money.
Winchbourne Court had passed to the young man
about a couple of years before his marriage; it had
been in the possession of an old couple for many, many
years, and though, as the heir to the property, young
Heatherington had been down frequently to see his
uncle and aunt, especially in the shooting season,
he was as yet something of an unknown quantity to
the people among whom he was going to live.
With the inmates of Pitt Place he had always been
intimate, however. There was the slightest sugges-
tion of kinship between the Prentice family and the
Heatheringtons, indeed it had been whispered rather
audibly in the village at the time of his marriage that
Sir Francis's choice of a wife had signified a bitter
disappointment to the woman who lived so proudly
and austerely at Pitt Place.  Assuredly Sheila
Prentice would have made a very charming mistress
of Winchbourne Court; no one conceded that more
certainly than Patricia, who had a love for her sister
which bordered on adoration. At the same time,
Patricia was not sorry that Sir Francis should have



<pb n="5"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.                5
ne else. " Because I don't want you to
e; there isn't a man in the world good
my Sheila," she had declared once when
B  alone with her sister one night, and had
the joy and privilege of brushing that
icent hair.
you wouldn't talk such rubbish," Sheila
almost snappishly.  It was the usual
iSheila to be snappish and disagreeable.
Patricia had gone to Leipsic for that
-ar of hard work and almost incredible
Seila had been so different. Although her
-ever been impulsive, passionate, emotional
)ensitive as Patricia knew herself to be,
been very lovable, always good-tempered
i. mannered, and, for one who from her
ood had been taught to know she was
arly free from vanity.
Ftricia had seen absolutely no difference
bit little by little, imperceptibly almost,
Io'n tO know that the girl she had left
she had found on her return, were two
ioalities.  Others might have seen,
did see, in this change of disposition
ntice,' merely the ordinary development
ilstincts, for in Sheila's hard outlook,
and her proud indifference there was
reproduction of their mother's habitual
'Patricia could not bring herself to believe
had been so little of their mother in
the old days! She had never been wild
L was; never had cared for the things the
irl loved, but she had been, in her own



<pb n="6"/>
6              A YOUNG MAN
way, just as fresh and natural. And there had been
the strongest bond of affection between the sisters.
There were times now when it seemed to Patricia as
if she and Sheila were as far apart as if they
inhabited different worlds.
" Is it because she is growing older, or is it only
because she is dull and wants a change of some
sort ?" Patricia asked herself many times, and after
a while she arrived at a conclusion.
"I shall speak to mother about her.  I am sure
Sheila ought to go away. It is her turn now.
Mother must let her go to Aunt Judith for a
time."
It was the morning of the day on which Sir
Francis and Lady Amelia were to arrive at Winch-
bourne. There was to be a dinner at the Court in
the evening, a dinner to which Mrs. Prentice and
her daughters were going, of course; and sundry
small things being required, Patricia had volunteered
to walk over to Marketborough-their nearest town-
and get these things. Her thoughts were busy
about her sister as she went. When she was not
dreaming about her music, Patricia was thinking of
Sheila It was so contrary to her nature to be low-
spirited or to worry, but she was becoming gradually
conscious that dull and uneventful as her home life
was, there were certain elements in it which provoked
restlessness of thought and paved the way for worry.
Her shopping took some time, but when she left
the town again to start on her five-mile walk home-
ward she made a pleasant discovery:
"Why, the wind has shifted! I do believe it's
dying down; what luck! Of course it will rain now



<pb n="7"/>
FROM THE COUNTRY.                   7
I but I'd a thousand times rather get wet
- than be blown inside out."
iwas well equipped for the gloomy weather.
-  were sensibly short, her feet sensibly shod.
on an ulster and a tam-o'-shanter; on her
s a string bag full of parcels and packages.
dy young limbs made short work of the
uleep hill which led to the main road, the
road. When she got to the top, however,
J.to stand a moment to get her breath before
and the, two dogs that accompanied her
tloo. One of them sat down contentedly in
l mud to wait, but the other stood and
ap.preciatively at the contents of the string
was the greedy one.
this highly-pitched resting place Patricia
isee across the country for miles; the land
, it had a grey, a brown, a sombre tone.
:ealy summer it was like a patchwork of many
.with the cultivated fields of ripe corn and
,;and here and there patches of canary-hued
wlrhich swayed gracefully in the soft wind.
was a seat a little higher up the road and
walked there and sat down on it, relieving
l of her burden for a while. This was a
t.spot with her. She always enjoyed looking
Elths broad stretch of country. The town was
ely hidden; not even the smoke of its many
eys dimmed the clearness of the atmosphere.
in the hollow was a large farmstead, the
ous buildings and high stacks having at this
the look of being toys. When she stood
h here, there always came upon Patricia a long-



<pb n="8"/>
8             A YOUNG MAN
ing to be able to spread her wings and take flight
with the birds as they fluttered into the mist of the
far, far horizon.
Odds and ends of vehicles went by without dis-
turbing her dreamy mood, and a few people were
walking, but the wet weather kept most folk at home.
She woke with a great start, however, when a smart
motor car appeared on the crest of the hill, and
then whizzed past her out of sight almost before she
had time to breathe. Then there came tearing along
with a good deal of smoke, and smell, and noise,
another car, a much smaller one, painted a bright red.
Patricia waved her hand to the occupant of this, and
Dr. Mitchinson pulled up.
"What are you doing there? Are you wantin' to
get a good attack of rheumatism ?" he demanded in
a loud voice. "Get up at once! Get up, I say, and
march along! "
She only laughed.
"How odiously professional you are. Your mind
can think of nothing but pains and aches! That for
your rheumatism! " she snapped her fingers at him.
Dr. Mitchinson got out of his car, a small weather-
beaten man, with shrewd but very kindly eyes gleam-
ing out of a network of wrinkles.
" Maybe you'll sing another tune one of these days,
my lass. Where have you been ? "
She showed him the string bag bulging with
packages.
"'I've been a marketing, sir,' she said." Then
her face lighting up mischievously: "I say! won't
Mrs. Bartingale be furious that the wind has dropped
just to-day of all days? You know there was quite a



<pb n="9"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.               9
yesterday when Sheila put a stop to everything.
Bartingale was actually insisting on having the
en grouped somewhere to sing their song and
their flags if Sheila hadn't impressed her with
adness of the whole thing. As it is, I hear that
and his wife will have to drive home by
eld."
>o I hear too, and it's settled there's to be a
on at the station. I made sure you two girls
be going with the rest."
Mitchinson had taken up the string bag and
*.eighing it in his hand.
Here's something to carry! " he said. " Can you
a while, Patsy, I'll be coming back maybe in an
? Or why not come along with me? I'm only
to the hospital and to Dyner's the chemist.
e Lord's name, what have you got in here ? "
Bacon, cheese, butter, lard, and a heap of other
-s. I always carry these things, the stores won't
them. I wish though I could wait for you, or
hwith you, but I can't; I must get back as soon as
ssibly can. Mother always limits the time for
etown excursions. We shall meet to-night, I
e? I can't help thinking how pleased Frank's
will be to have us all foisted on her for dinner
very, first evening she arrives! Is Mrs. Mitchinson
g to meet them at the station ?"
he doctor shook his head.
*'My wife knows when she's well off." He
ped back and surveyed the sky. "It's not
tly bride's weather, is it? We'll have something
er on hand the day you marry, Patsy!" Then
amade her get up: "You've sat there quite long



<pb n="10"/>
Io            A YOUNG MAN
enough. Perhaps I'll be catching you up. Do you
go the road way ? "
She shook her head.
"I shall go back through Birchbeck woods, it's
ever so much nearer, and there one is out of the way
of these nasty, noisy, smelling motor cars. I believe
you invented that horror to keep you in employment.
How many people have you killed this week ?"
He pinched her cheek with the right of an old and
privileged friend and then, with another injunction
to hurry on and not sit about in damp garments, he
got into his car again, and Patsy listened to its grunts,
and groans, and general rumbling fade gradually into
the distance.
" He's such a dear," she said to herself as she began
to trudge onwards. "I'm rather sorry I couldn't have
had a lift home."
As she whistled to the dogs and shifted her heavy
bag from one arm to the other, Patricia laughed.
She was recalling the scene of the day before when
the rector's wife had been forced so reluctantly to
forego all the preparations which had cost her so many
weeks of anxious thought.
" My goodness! wasn't she in a rage. For two pins
I do believe she would have hit Sheila. I do wonder
what would have happened then?"
She had to pause a moment to wait for Binks,
the Aberdeen terrier, who had disappeared and was
a long time answering to his name. When at last
he crept from out of a hedge he had a fearsome
object in his jaws, a lump of earth on his nose and
a deprecating expression in his eyes.  It took
Patricia some time and a good deal of courage to



<pb n="11"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              II
Ipose of the dead, the very dead rat, and then
ks had to be drawn bodily away from the ditch
here his prey had been flung so heartlessly, and
I sequently Patricia had to hurry on to make up
r lost time.
It was pleasant walking through the wood; only
string bag made her arms ache.
"So there is to be a reception at the station.
r Frank, he is in for a lovely time.   Mrs.
rtingale was determined he should not escape.
oehow I can't imagine him a married man. I'm
fully curious to see his wife. I wonder whether
will be nice to us ?" Then Patsy shrugged her
oulders-" But it won't matter much; she may be
er so nice, but if mother isn't nice back again we
't gain anything by it. If it weren't for Sheila
believe I would beg, borrow or steal to get away
m here again and run back to Germany! Some-
es," said Patsy, speaking to the two dogs, "that
eI was away from here seems like a lovely dream.
aideas I had, what schemes, and what hopes.
nd what a silly little life mine is! Walking to
e town to get groceries and sewing silk for Sheila
d tulle frilling for mother's cap! Why I haven't
uched the piano for a week!  And as for my
!oice-well, I believe you dogs would howl with
ustification if you heard me sing now! "
Binks, who was trotting closely beside her, sneezed
a hearty assent, but Milo, the fox terrier, was
couring a field as they emerged from the gloom of
the wood, having caught sight of a stray bird.
~. By and by the long road came to an end and,
after climbing another hill, Patricia found herself



<pb n="12"/>
12            A YOUNG MAN
opposite a farm and a lane which provided a nice
short cut to her home, that quaint old house
where her mother had lived all her married life and
which was so well named, for it had actually been
built on the floor of an old pit or large hollow. A
young man on horseback was coming up the lane,
and Patricia stood on one side to let him pass. He
wore a very rough riding suit, with dark brown
laggings well-stained; a tweed cap was pressed down
on his dark hair. At a cursory glance one saw that
he was handsome.
Instead of passing her he reined in his horse
beside the girl.
"How d'ye do? I have come to meet you," he
said. "I have a message for you. I have just been
to Pitt Place, and your sister asked me if I would
ride on this way and meet you, because it seems she
is coming along the road in the pony trap now, and
you are to wait for her here."
"Wait here? What for? " Patricia enquired.
" Miss Prentice told me your mother had expressed
a wish that you should both go to the station with
the others and meet Sir Francis."
Patricia frowned.
"Good Heavens! what a bother!" Then she
looked at him doubtfully. "I say, you are not
inventing this, are you ?"
Anthony Sharpus smiled and shook his head.
Patricia was annoyed.
"How like mother! Why couldn't she decide
on this earlier? How can I go to the station like
this?  Did you ever see such an object?  Lady
Amelia will think I am a scarecrow."



<pb n="13"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              13
!Mr. Sharpus let his dark eyes rest on her for an
"You look as you generally do," he said, "and if
dy Amelia expects to be met by folk in silks and
ins in such weather as this she must be a fool."
"Lady Amelia is the daughter of a duke, and
ughters of dukes, according to Mrs. Bartingale,
never, never, never be anything but perfec-
She shifted her bag from one arm to the other.
"I do think mother might have told me before I
nt out this morning, or at least have given me a
ance of making myself a little respectable," she
id resentfully. The next moment she laughed. " But,
er all, what does it matter?  Everybody will be
to busy staring at Frank's wife to bother about me.
<It must be nice to be important! I should rather
like to be Lady Amelia for some things. Do you
lnow, I always want to be the bride whenever I see a
wedding."
Mr. Sharpus bent forward to smooth the neck of
the animal he was riding; a nervous clean bred mare,
which resented the standing still and edged round
fretfully in the roadway.
" Can't I do something to help you. Give me that
bag, you don't want to take this with you to the
station."
"It's so heavy, and there is bacon in it and cheese,
and the butter will grease you," Patricia said,
doubtfully; "and besides you don't want to go to
--Pitt Place again, I am sure."
p    But he bent forward and stretched out his hand,
so she gave him the bag to hoist up.
K:



<pb n="14"/>
14             A  YOUNG MAN
"Well, it's awfully kind of you, Mr. Sharpus, but
do please be careful of that cardboard box at the top.
There is some new frilling in it for mother's cap to-
night. We are all dining at the Court, you know."
"I will be very careful," said Mr. Sharpus.
He had some difficulty in disposing of the string
bag, whilst the mare was circling and backing so
nervously, but he did it: and Patricia watched him
with keen interest.  She always enjoyed seeing
Anthony Sharpus manage his horse; he had such
strength and such tact, and withal such a masterly
influence. As the pony trap was not in sight, she
sat down on a mile-stone sunk in the bank, and the
dogs sat one on either side of her. It was not
actually raining but the air was moist and she
shivered once.
"I feel tired," she said suddenly, and she sighed.
"I'll sit here till Sheila comes. Really, I am
tremendously obliged to you, Mr. Sharpus, for
taking those things off my hands. I hate parcels,
and that bag weighs a lot, doesn't it? Don't let me
keep you, I expect you have no end of things to do."
But he said he was in no hurry.
"What about the dogs, will they follow you?" he
asked.
She shook her head.
"No, they must go home. Look at them. Poor
darlings, they understand so well. I shouldn't mind
taking them, but they fidget Sheila" Then she asked
him a question: "How are your children?"
"Very well, thank you. You must come and see
them, will you? They are at the farm now. They
came back from the sea yesterday."



<pb n="15"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              15
a's face lit up.
adore children. I shall love to see them. And
I:shall try and make great friends with them. Isn't
itat the pony trap coming?  Now, dogs, you must
*o!" She got up and gave her orders. "Home-
Binks, and straight home too; no going into the
Chaffers' yard to chase the ducks."
They both laughed as the dogs turned and
trotted away side by side, obediently but most
disconsolately.
"They are so human," Patsy said, "and such
friends. Of course Binks is a scoundrel, but that is
why I love him the better of the two. Do you know
be has taken to stealing eggs? You had better warn
your bailiff's wife to keep her hen-house door safely
locked." Then Patricia gave him her hand. "Good-
bye. It really is awfully kind of you to take that bag
of things; I know they are wanted. I am ever so
much obliged."
As she got into the low phaeton and Mr. Sharpus
trotted away, Patricia said: "I'm horribly untidy,
but I hadn't the least idea that mother meant us to go
to the station, had you?"
-" Don't sit too close to me, please," Sheila answered
Sharply. A moment later she discussed Anthony
Sharpus, "Why are you so intimate in your manner
-with that man ? You treat him as if you had known
im all your life, whereas he is an absolute stranger.
don't generally agree with Mrs. Bartingale, but I
rust say she is right about Mr. Sharpus: there is
omnething mysterious about him. You must see for
self," Sheila said impatiently, "that there is
tling odd. Why on earth should a young man



<pb n="16"/>
i6             A YOUNG MAN
with money choose to come and bury himself in a
dead-and-alive hole like this ?"
"I suppose a young man with money must live
somewhere," said Patricia a little drily. She had
carefully drawn away from Sheila, who looked
extremely handsome and well garbed, although she
only wore a tweed coat and skirt and a beaver cap
on her bright red-brown hair.
"And then he is a widower. So funny!" Miss
Prentice continued irritably, as she flicked the old
pony in a futile fashion.
" So inconsiderate of his wife to die," said Patricia
with a laugh; then she sighed. "I really don't see
why we should object to Mr. Sharpus-he goes to
church, he pays his bills-if he didn't, Winchbourne
would soon know all about that. Of course he may
have killed his wife, or he may not have had one at
all, then he would be outside our good graces, but
seeing that he is amiable enough to take messages
for you, and carry parcels for me, I don't see why
he shouldn't be permitted the grace of exchanging
a few words with us occasionally."
Sheila drove on with compressed lips for a moment.
"You are so fond of sneering now-a-days," she
said when she spoke, and Patricia fancied that her
sister's voice quavered a little. This was enough to
touch her instantly.
"Dearest," she said, and she put out her hand to
lay it affectionately on Sheila's wrist, but Sheila did
not encourage the suggested tenderness. She was
occupied in urging the pony to a faster trot.
"You don't quite understand what I mean. You
are so young in some things, Patsy. One can't go



<pb n="17"/>
-     FROM   THE COUNTRY.              17
making friends in this indiscriminate way, the
is fll of such funny people, and one reads of
awful things."
Patri-cia laughed.  She had drawn back her hand
again  very quickly.
I don't know how you feel, but I know I should
be rather gladSif something sensational would happen,
it would wake us up perhaps. Do you think if we
gave him a hint Mr. Sharpus would confess to a
crime? I am just in the mood for an explosion."
Sheila ignored this remark, and they drove on for
some distance in silence.
Patricia felt very closely akin to tears, why she
could hardly have told, only that she was tired and
Sheila's irritability troubled her.
After awhile she spoke again.
They were drawing nearer to the small station at
which the bride and bridegroom were to arrive. A
motor car had passed them, it was a new one and
would wait for Sir Francis and his wife, and was
followed by an omnibus for the servants and the
luggage.
"What possessed mother to send us here?"
Patricia queried. "This morning she was very
scornful about the fuss that was being made about
Frank. In fact, I quite expected she would back out
-of the dinner to-night."
Miss Prentice shrugged her shoulders.
"Why ask me to explain anything mother does?
suppose she has a reason for this as for most things."
t_ Well, anyhow," said Patricia brightly, determined
usual to try and make the best of things, "I shall
eawfully glad to see Frank again! "
I                                      2



<pb n="18"/>
I8            A YOUNG MAN
"Shall you?"
Sheila spoke with supreme indifference. They
were no longer alone on the road. Odds and ends
of people were trudging in the direction of the station,
where a goodly number was already assembled stand-
ing patiently in the rain to see what there was to
be seen. Patricia nodded to one and another, but
there were many whom she did not know, and as they
turned a bend in the road they very nearly had an
accident, for a man who was lurching uncertainly
along by the side of the hedge suddenly staggered
forward, and, for a moment, was in a direct line
with the advancing trap. Patricia put her hand out
involuntarily and gave a little scream.
"Oh!-Oh!      " she said in great alarm. "Pull
up, Sheila, darling."
But Sheila Prentice took no notice of her sister.
She drove on, and as the man fell back in the nick of
time, she flicked the whip at him as though he had
been a dog. The drunkard stood and shouted abuse
after them.
Patricia caught her breath. She was trembling a
little.
" That was a near shave," she said. " I don't know
how he escaped. What a horrid looking man! I am
glad I didn't meet him when I was coming back from
the town-I should have been terrified to death."
Sheila Prentice laughed.
" I am rather sorry I didn't run him down, such pigs
ought to be killed," she said between her teeth.
They pulled up as she said this, and Patsy got out.
The girl just glanced at Sheila and then glanced
away. She had seen at once of course that her sister



<pb n="19"/>
FROM        THE COUNTRY.             ig
extremely 'annoyed about something.  In all
ility,  Sheila resented being sent on their
t errand. To ponder, however, on such a
e, was futile, to search for explanations for
a's variable moods, so unsatisfactory.  "And
I think I am the one who ought to be cross,"
cia said to herself, "at least, she was given time
dress herself properly. I can see Mrs. Bartingale
nat me now, and taking me all in. She will
for a month about my disorderly appearance!"
then because this expression appealed to her
orously, Patricia laughed, and when she laughed
, B was well with her.
A2,'
P: 
2*



<pb n="20"/>
20             A YOUNG MAN
CHAPTER II.
THE train was a little late.  Sheila elected to wait
in the booking-office where there was a fire. She
occupied herself in warming her hands and listening
to Mrs. Bartingale, who held herself with much
importance as befitted the occasion.
"I met dear Lady Amelia once in London," she
was saying, "it was at Middlesex House and the
duchess was so kind-she sold me some tweed her-
self, cut it off with her own hands."
Sheila smiled very faintly.
"Is she pretty?" she asked. "Frank said he was
going to send us her portrait, but it hasn't come
yet."
"Tall, distinguished-most attractive," said Mrs.
Bartingale, "which is so much better than being
merely pretty, you know." She discoursed on about
the one and only time she had met Lady Amelia
She spoke a little loudly: she wished to impress
those about her. To impress other people pleasantly
or otherwise was the "raison d'etre" of Mrs. Bar-
tingale's existence.
Despite the annoyance Sheila had caused her the
day before, Mrs. Bartingale shewed a friendly dis-



<pb n="21"/>
r           FROM    THE COUNTRY.              21
.ition now. As a matter of fact she purposely
ched herself to Miss Prentice, remembering that
ie family at Pitt Place and Sir Francis were kins-
;.ieople. Moreover, though she expressed herself
:strongly on the question of the Prentice girls to the
I.ector in private, she really posed to the others in
ithe neighbourhood as being the only person who was
admitted to an intimacy by Mrs. Prentice.
While they stood together, Sheila warming her
pretty, daintily shod foot at the fire, Patricia was
walking up and down outside with the rector.
In the roadway there was by now quite a crowd.
The rain was falling steadily, but the village people
braved the wet and lined the road on each side
through which the Winchbourne Court carriages
would pass.
A little way apart from those standing in the
waiting-room, was the station-master's eldest child
bearing a posy tied with bright pink ribbon ready
to give to the bride.
"Really, it is most unlucky," said Mr. Bartingale
for about the hundredth time. "If only they had
come home last week! "
Patricia assented a little absently. Her mind was
held as in a vice by a sudden thought which had
come to her, a kind of suggestion that perhaps Sheila
was not cross or disagreeable, that her changed
disposition had nothing to do with bad temper, but
, tat it was the outcome of quite a different state of
I: "1 don't exactly know why she should be unhappy,"
itia mused uneasily; "it's true we haven't much
our lives to make us jolly, and Sheila never cared
3



<pb n="22"/>
22             A YOUNG MAN
for the country as I do, still, though we are dull and
mother is hard to live with, we haven't anything
really to make us miserable, I mean no real down-
right trouble." She replied at random to some
remark of the rector's, and continued conjecturing
eagerly. " Of course, it may be only an idea of mine,
but then I don't know  . . . I was away such a
long time . . . Did anything happen while I was
away, I wonder? Everything seemed to go on just
as usual and everything else is just as it used to
be. It is only Sheila who is changed  . 
"Here she comes! " exclaimed the rector excitedly.
The station bell was clanged by a porter, and Mrs.
Bartingale fussed out on to the platform and pre-
pared her smile to greet the distinguished passengers.
Patricia pushed her way behind those assembled on
the platform.
"I'd give anything to be able to ask her right
out if anything is bothering her, but I simply daren't.
I always rush to Sheila and blurt out everything
that is happening, but she is so different, and
I know she would hate and loathe to be asked
questions."
She caught sight of Sheila at that moment, her
sister made a sign to her to hurry, and as Patricia
passed into the booking-office, Sheila advanced and
slipped her hand through the other girl's arm.
"Let us stand here behind the others," she said,
"it won't very much matter if we are not seen."
She pressed closely to Patricia, in fact she seemed
to lean on her sister, and Patricia had a sudden thrill
of pleasure; with it mingled a little anxiety, how-
ever.



<pb n="23"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              23
You are shivering, darling. I do hope you have
caught cold," she said.
Sheila shook her head. "Only it is so draughty
,'-atricia caught her sister's hand and held it
enderly.
<" Well, we shall get away directly. I don't think
i\ would be a bad plan if you walked a bit going
home, Sheila. It is so horribly damp."
- The train was pulled up at that moment and
Patricia at once caught sight of her kinsman's tall
figure and exceedingly good-looking face. He was
i bare-headed and turned to assist his wife to alight
before shaking hands all round.   There was a
decided genial and pleasant air about Sir Francis.
About Lady Amelia it was not so easy to pass an
| opinion. She was as Mrs. Bartingale had said, very
tall and very thin, so much could be discerned, though
- the bride was wrapped about in a voluminous cloak,
} which was bordered and seemingly lined with sable,
u t as she wore a kind of motor-hat, her face and head
[ were completely swathed in the folds of a blue gauze
-ei[L   As the little group parted and the home-
Corners advanced into the booking-office, the station-
easter's little girl, blushing a furious crimson and
al   a curtsey in a fright to her father's back,
ced with her nosegay, and at that moment Sir
looked about him and saw the two sisters
together in the background.
asy!" he exclaimed, and took a step forward,
his arm from his wife's arm. He had kissed
before she was aware of it and then he stood
Sheila's Prentice's slim hand in his, and his



<pb n="24"/>
24             A YOUNG MAN
eyes were looking into her eyes as they never had 
and never would look into the eyes of the woman he
had married.
"It-it was good of you to come," he said a little
hoarsely. Releasing his hold of that delicate hand,
he turned to his wife.
"Amy," he said, "here are my kinswomen, Sheila
and Patricia Prentice, come to give us welcome."
Lady Amelia said something graceful, something
appropriate.  She had the air and the manner of
one who had grown weary of saying graceful things,
of being always "en evidence."  Patricia was sud-
denly conscious of a kind of pang. Brides to her
had been so far personified in blushing youth, in a
kind of embodied radiance which was infectious and
delightful. About Lady Amelia Heatherington there
was no radiance, and assuredly there was no youth.
"Married his grandmother, by Gad!" whispered
one of the men into another man's ear.
It was Sir Francis's duty to pass on, of course, but
he seemed very loth to leave those two pretty young
figures standing by the fireside in the booking-office.
He fell back again and addressed them, speaking
to Patricia but looking always at Sheila. At Sheila,
who had grown very, very white, on whose delicate
and really beautiful face there rested almost a
haggard look. Her hand still clinging to Patricia's
arm had ceased to tremble, it felt instead limp and
heavy.
" How are you going back; surely you didn't walk
here?" Sir Francis queried, eagerly.
It was Patricia who answered.
"We drove," she said; "have you forgotten our



<pb n="25"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             25
:Lghant chariot? Who are we that we should walk
the mud when we can drive in chaises? And we
anmust be off too. Come along, darling, the great
-!eevent is over, and Frank has the joy of knowing he
i will see us to-night Do go!" said Patricia actually
r tpshing him back to his duty. "They are waiting,
'you have to make a speech, you know."
Sheila Prentice then spoke.
" Please go," she said, "we are all right, and your
wife is waiting."
He turned at once.
Lady Amelia had got into the motor and was
looking out listlessly at the clusters of soaked people
who had gathered to do her honour even in the cold
'and the driving rain. As Sir Francis appeared there
was a little shout of welcome, and he promptly went
round and shook hands with all those standing near.
He had a very cheery manner and the very useful
trick of saying the right thing to the right person.
Just now to anyone studying him closely, however,
the effect of his manner might have conveyed a sense
of nervousness, as though, indeed, he spoke and
laughed and joked with an effort. He was kissing a
baby and scattering largesse as Sheila and Patricia
Prentice left the station and went towards their
pony phaeton. They were walking separately and
' Patricia was a little in advance of her sister. She
'bad a curious desire pressing on her to be away
from this scene: in a degree, too, she felt appre-
i hensive, though of what she would have found it
-difficult to say.  Being ahead, Patricia was never
i able to realise exactly what happened, but all at
01nce, just as she was close to the pony trap, she
k--



<pb n="26"/>
26             A YOUNG MAN
was conscious of hearing Sheila exclaim sharply,
protestingly, and turning quickly saw that a man
was standing in front of her sister, and that his
manner was distinctly threatening and abusive.
Throwing the reins she was holding back into
the hand of the lad who had been taking care of
the trap, Patricia hurried to her sister's support, but
quickly as she moved, another was before her.
Though apparently so deeply engrossed by the de-
mands of the moment, Sir Francis Heatherington in
reality had followed every movement Sheila had
made, and now as he saw her confronted with a
drunken tramp, as he saw this man actually dare to
put his hand on the girl's arm and approach his
face very closely to hers, a savage burst of rage
possessed him, an anger which was (though he was far
from realising this at the moment) a natural outlet
to the other feelings pressing so painfully on his
heart.  He was utterly carried away.   Suddenly
pushing aside those who were about him, Sir Francis
ran across the road and in the twinkling of an eye
he had swung the man in front of Sheila out of her
path. So swift, so unexpected was his onslaught,
that the man staggered a pace or two and then fell
heavily; and rolled over in the mud.
Sir Francis would have followed him to administer
further correction but Sheila's voice awakened him
to the knowledge of what he was doing, of what he
had yet to do.
"No-no, Frank    I beg of you-let him go-
for my sake don't, please don't make this worse."
The words were gasped rather than spoken.
Sheila gripped her sister's arm nervously.



<pb n="27"/>
FROM       THE COUNTRY.              27
: 'Oh! Patsy, let us get home-let us get home,"
whispered.
- Various others had hurried forward to see what
s wrong, or to give help if needed, but the girls
pgot into the trap and to save further bother or
aestioning Patricia took the reins and drove on
i away from the station and out of reach of the eager,
curious eyes.  It was the longest" way homewards,
but of this neither girl thought or cared. Both were
only intent on getting into the welcome solitude of
the deserted roads, though the impulse which urged
them on was so totally different. Sir Francis
watched them go and then went to help the man he
had thrown to rise. As he approached the station
master said apologetically:
"A bit stunned, Sir Francis, but I don't suppose
there's any harm done. He's been hanging about
here all this morning going in and out of 'The
Volunteers,' and not doin' himself no good by that.
You leave him to me, Sir Francis, I'll see to him, sir."
Heatherington put a sovereign into the station
master's hand.
"Do you know the fellow?" he asked. All his
bright cheeriness had flown, he looked vexed and
tired and out of spirits.
"Never seen him afore, Sir Francis, but he's all
-right. Here, some o' you fellows, lend a hand here,
' we'll carry him into the shed on the up line."
. Lady Amelia was sitting back in the motor listen-
gindifferently to Mrs. Bartingale's flow of conver-
|&tion
i * Pray do not stand in the rain," she had said once.
tthe rector's wife ignored the hint and continued



<pb n="28"/>
28             A YOUNG MAN 
to stand at the door of the motor talking affably. 
She had given a little scream when Sir Francis had
dealt so summarily with the tramp.
"Oh! I do hope dear Sir Francis won't provoke
the man.   One never knows what these common
wretches will do." She broke into eager questions 
when Heatherington came back to the motor, but the '
young man had little to tell her. He shook hands ;
all round and got into the motor, and then he gave 1
an order to be driven as quickly as possible to the '
Court.
"The sooner we go the sooner these poor souls
will get back to their firesides. It isn't weather for
a dog to stand about in."
"I don't suppose a little rain, more or less, will
hurt them," said Lady Amelia. She had discarded
the nosegay she had received at the station, it lay
on the rug of the carriage at her feet. Sir Francis
stooped and picked it up and as there was nowhere
else to put it he held it in his hand.
"Who are these relations of yours-you did not
mention them before?" Lady Amelia said after a
little while.
"I fancy I must have spoken of them.      Mrs.
Prentice and my father's second wife were cousins."
Lady Amelia undid the gauze veil and pushed it
up on to her brow. She was frowning and her sal-
low thin face had a touch of colour in it.
"That constitutes very slight relationship with
yourself, Frank," she said.
He conceded this.
"But the fact is," he said, "that I have grown so
accustomed to regard them as belonging to me



<pb n="29"/>
;       FROM    THE COUNTRY.              29
that I find it difficult to get out of the habit.  I
fancy you will like Mrs. Prentice."
He was speaking with a touch of irritation. It
was a new thing to his wife to hear that tone in his
voice. His amazing good humour had been the lead-
ing characteristic about him since their marriage,
and oddly enough she had begun to resent this good
humour. It had puzzled her, she had even gone
so far as to regard it as an affront to herself.
"He takes nothing seriously," she had mused just
a few days ago when they had been in Paris. " Life
is only one big joke to him."
And now he was shewing signs of ill-temper and
that was more disagreeable than his other mood.
She made no answer to his last speech, and Sir
Francis sat fingering the cheap pink ribbon which
had been wound with such care and tightness about
the bunch of homely flowers. It was typical of the
woman that she should see no grace in this common
offering; typical of the man that he should try to
protect something at once humble and precious.
They had been from the first an ill-assorted couple,
but never so jarringly so till this day when by the
irony of fate they were entering the gateway of their
real union, when life in its closest significance awaited
them.
Lady Amelia sat and looked out of the window
and shivered as she looked.
"What an ugly country," she said; " does it always
rain here? "
Sir Francis wakened from his thoughts with a
start.
"Fortunately we are only an hour and a half from



<pb n="30"/>
30             A YOUNG MAN
town, and there are some good trains, then there is
the little place in Scotland if you want change."
"Oh! I suppose we must stay here for some time
at least."
She sat back and closed her eyes. On her 'worn i
and sallow face that patch of bright colour had a ;
painted look, her lips were compressed, and her thin 
hands, clenched together in the warm depths of her 
sable muff, trembled with cold, the first significant
touch of that wholly terrible anguish which is the
veritable accompaniment to the worst of all passions, 
jealousy.
The carriage bowled along swiftly and the village
of Springfield was reached. Here more people were
clustered together and some boys perched upon rail-
ings and gates waved their caps and shouted a shrill,
shout as the motor went rapidly past them.
The rector had spoken of the vain attempts to
decorate their own village and Sir Francis had laugh-
ingly sympathised with the kind intention. Now he
felt thankful that they had been spared the ordeal
of a long slow drive, of speeches and triumphal
arches. This quick transit through the pouring rain
with nothing but grey shadows on either side of them
was so much more fitting, so infinitely more in keep-
ing with the kind of life which stretched before them.
All at once he had a great fear for the future.  It
was as though he had been dreaming and was sud-
denly and roughly awakened. Nothing had seemed
real or of great import to him till that moment when
Sheila had put her hand into his and her eyes had
looked upwards into his eyes speaking a language 
which had been seemingly unknown to them in old



<pb n="31"/>
FROM THEJ.COUNTRY.              3I
ys, in those days when he had been content merely
stand as a shadow in her life asking nothing,
elieving indeed she had nothing to give. There
been pleasure and pain in that servitude, but the
i pain had predominated. And so he had gone away
and cultivated indifference, had tried and had in a
sense succeeded in forgetting Sheila and all she
signified to him. He had asked for sympathy from
others and sympathy had been lavished upon him
till this offering from warmer hearts had lain like a
pall of flowers on the grave where he had buried
his love for Sheila Prentice. And now the grave
had been torn rudely open and the love he had called
dead had walked from its resting place. A stronger,
a more engrossing love: a love which could mean
nothing but misery since it was garmented in despair
and rooted in utter hopelessness. Why had she stood
aloof in those old days ? Why have driven him from
lter so determinately?
Had he loved her less he might have added another
:ad more vital question  Why, having known and
rejected his love when he had been free, had she
diasen to open her heart and make confession
4 what was shrined there when she knew he was
ttMvocably lost to her?  Would it not have been
e thousand times better to have left him in his
.. rance ? to have played her role to the bitter end?
E  .ething of this same query pressed on Sheila's
ued mind as she and Patricia drove homeward
sience through the falling rain and the early
ABut I did not know I should care," she said to her-
in a, sort of dumb anguish. "I never did care
f.



<pb n="32"/>
32             A YOUNG MAN
before, but then I never had need of him in the old
days." 
She was vaguely grateful to Patricia for being
silent. To have listened to chatter, to have bee&
called upon to speak about Frank in a casual
way, to discuss his wife would have been unendur-
able. As they drew near to Pitt Place, Sheila broke
the silence.
"Patsy, whatever you do, don't on any account
tell mother about that man-that tramp whom Frank
knocked down-she might be upset."
"I shan't say anything," said Patricia quietly; then
she asked, " do you feel less frightened now, darling ?
I am so sorry I wasn't near you-I am so strong I
could easily have pushed him away."
Sheila turned to her sister and kissed her.
"Silly little Patsy, dear little Patsy!" she said, "it
is I who should take care of you." 
Patricia's heart beat very quickly. This was how'
Sheila used to speak to her, the same loving voic
and teasing way. And Sheila used to give so many
kisses in those dear old days.
This was the first kiss spontaneously bestowed sinc
Patricia had been home.
It was a moment of inconceivable happiness an
still it was tempered with anxiety.
"I am   worried about you, darling," she said.
"You must be wet through. If mother was sd
anxious for us to come we ought to have had the?
brougham."
"Oh! I will change and then I will lie down
Mother won't mind for once because of to-night.
She will want me to look my best-and I feel such a



<pb n="33"/>
r           FROM    THE COUNTRY.              33
rag. I wish I need not go! Oh, I do wish I need
not go, Patsy!"
"Why should you go! I'm sure you won't miss
much. Lady Amelia looks stuck up and disagree-
able. If mother and I go, that is surely quite
enough."
As they drove into the stable yard of the old house,
Patricia said eagerly and tenderly:
"Do, sweetheart, let me fix this up with mother.
If you say you are not well it will be all right."
"Mother will make a fuss," Sheila said with
something of her usual impatience. Then her tone
changed: "But I am ill, tired and ill. Tell mother
I have one of my bad headaches. It is the truth,"
Sheila said with a wan smile.
Patricia only kissed her sister and they walked
slowly up the stairs together. At Sheila's door they
parted.
"I am going to lock myself in. I want to be quiet
-very, very quiet, Patsy."
"No one shall disturb you, darling," Patricia said,
bravely keeping back her tears.
She paused and watched Sheila pass into her room,
and she shivered as she heard the key turn in the
~lock.
Inside the cosy, familiar room Sheila Prentice stood
:Aiwhen she was alone, and pressed her hands to her
l®yes, as if to shut out some horrible vision.
If God would only let me die! " she said hoarsely
herself.
3



<pb n="34"/>
34            A YOUNG MAN
CHAPTER III.
THE warmest of welcomes had awaited Sir Francis
Heatherington and his wife at Winchbourne Court.
The old servants had been kept on, and made quite
an imposing appearance as they assembled in the 
hall, headed by the housekeeper, to receive their
master and new mistress. Sir Francis was well
known to them, and well liked. He had the gift of
winning hearts easily, especially those whose lot it
was to serve him.
The sight of the pleasant faces, the glow of the
wood fire in the wide old fireplace, and the cosy,
suggestive influence of home which pervaded the old 
house, was most agreeable to the young man.
Trouble was a new experience to him, heartache i
something which had never come to him before this 
day; he was unconsciously glad to slip away, even
in the most transitory fashion, from the weight of 
confused and miserable thought which had burdened
him through this long drive home. He went the
round of the servants, shaking hands with one and
all, and thanking everybody most heartily for the
good wishes stammered out
Lady Amelia watched him with a strange ex-
pression on her face. She had passed through the
hall, and stood by the fire warming her hands.
The tea-table had been prepared; it glittered with i



<pb n="35"/>
E    ~   FROM    THE COUNTRY.             35
the old silver which had been used for generations
at Winchbourne Court; but when Sir Francis came
back to his wife, and the butler had hurried away
to his quarters to bring in the urn and the hot cakes,
Lady Amelia announced her intention of going to
her room.
"I am tired and cold, and there's a great draught
-in this hall. I suppose there could be a screen or
a heavy curtain across that door," she observed
languidly.
"Oh, there is no necessity to sit here if you don't
care about it!" Sir Francis said. "The rooms are
very old-fashioned-in fact, the old house is quite
out of date; but I always found it cosy and homely,
and I hope you will endorse my opinion in a little
while."
They were alone for a moment; the lamps had
not been brought in, and the only light came from
the fire, where the big logs blazed in fine fashion
Something moved Heatherington to speak tenderly
to the woman beside him. In truth he had for her,
in this moment, an affectionate feeling, which sprang
from a very pure and very sincere sympathy.
With the knowledge of what might have been
possible, with the haunting loveliness of Sheila
visualized before him, turn which way he might, there
came to him a horrible sense of doing wrong.
He had not recovered as yet from the bewildering
.,eftect of the revelation which contact with Sheila
-had brought to him. Possibly, when he had time
!t. reflect, to count up what he had lost, a sense of
;.estlessness, even a bitterness and a resentment might
ke possession of him; but he was-as men of his
3*



<pb n="36"/>
36             A YOUNG MAN
stamp usually are-a creature of finest quality where
his emotions were concerned, and his impulse now
was regret; regret on his own account, on Sheila's
account, and, above all, on his wife's account.
He knew-as surely as he knew there was intense
heat in the fire by which they stood-that the
marriage between himself and this woman was a
wrong done to both of them. He blamed no one.
He had only a great, great desire to do everything
in his power to prevent this bitter knowledge from
reaching his wife's comprehension.
He put out his hand and closed one of hers in
his-a cold, very thin hand, on which the wedding-
ring hung loosely, the hand of a woman long past her
first youth.
"I will take you upstairs, Amy dear," he said;
"but I want to give you my welcome here. May
you be very happy, not only at Winchbourne Court,
but everywhere-always."
He bent towards her and kissed her as he spoke.
Lady Amelia drew back from him, but not angrily
-half wearily.
"We are, alas! no longer children, Frank, so we
cannot delude ourselves with childish ideas. I dare
say we shall jog along comfortably here and else-
where, as my father said, but we don't pretend to
look for happiness after we have said good-bye to
childhood."
She had released her hand, and made a move to
the stairs.
Sir Francis looked at her in a puzzled, a wistful
fashion.
"I don't believe I have said good-bye to child-



<pb n="37"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              37
hood, if by that one means having no more dreams
and fancies," he said. Then he changed his tone.
" Let me take off that coat here; it is such a weight,
and though we have not many stairs to climb, you
must not tire yourself unnecessarily. Remember, we
have all those people to dinner here to-night"
Lady Amelia allowed him to take the coat. She
was revealed then-a tall, straight figure, one of those
typical, tall, long-backed, parched kind of bodies
that one sees among the middle-aged unmarried
women in England. She had on a cloth gown, very
severely made; there were no laces or fripperies,
nothing to gleam or break the dullness.
A long time ago her mother, the Duchess of
Middlesex, had washed her hands of Lady Amelia
as a hopeless failure. She had, indeed, loudly de-
claimed that she failed to understand how or why
a beneficent Providence should have saddled her
with such a daughter.
"There is nothing of me in Amelia, that is very
sure. God knows where she comes from!" she had
been fond of saying.
As a child Lady Amelia had been plain; as a
girl she had been plainer still. She grew like a
reed, but she grew without grace. She was never
clever, never interesting. Her two sisters were so
different  Lady Hermione Wittingale had married
i brilliantly ih her first season, a German princelet, and
m her success had never been in question.
i Lady Sophie had been snapped up actually when
had been in the school-room, and the money she
married had saved the ducal house of Middlesex
a severe and ignominious financial disaster.



<pb n="38"/>
38             A YOUNG MAN
The Marquis of Sparbrooke, the eldest son, was
one of the most popular men in the Army and in
society, a source of unending joy to his mother and
trouble to his father; a reckless fellow, having his full
share of his family's traditional good looks, and nar-
rowly escaping sensational matrimony at every turn.
Lady Amelia had two other brothers, both equally
handsome and attractive. She, and she alone, had
marred the record of the family, and she had grown
from girlhood to young womanhood bitterly conscious
of her defects. Her mother assuredly had never
spared her. There had never been the slightest
pretence to affection between Lady Amelia and her
mother.
With her sisters she had even less consideration.
Her Serene Highness Princess Wilhelm of Guten-
staadt did once, it is true, invite Lady Amelia to
go with her to Harrogate when a course of baths had
to be undergone.  But "never again!" she had
written to her mother, who had built a good deal
on this little excursion with Hermione.
Occasionally someone of a good-natured turn of
mind had invited the ugly duckling to a country
visit or a yachting cruise; but for the most part
Lady Amelia had lived a dull, uneventful life under
her parents' roof, her existence being  merely
tolerated, and use being made of her from time to
time when some public office would be distasteful
to her mother, and she would be called upon to
deputise for the duchess at the opening of a bazaar,
or some function of that sort.
It had been, in fact, just this kind of work which
had been instrumental in bringing Lady Amelia in



<pb n="39"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY..             39
contact with Sir Francis Heatherington. They were
both members of a house-party, she having gone at
her mother's desire to christen a new ship built by
the wealthy people with whom she was staying.
Sir Francis joined the party for the shooting, and
circumstances combined to bring about a friendship
between these two most unlikely people.
A slight accident had seemed to break the ice of
conventional acquaintance. Sir Francis was able to
render some attention to Lady Amelia. He over-
took'her as she was limping back to the house after
a false step in which she had rather sharply twisted
her ancle-his concern about her was extraordinarily
pleasant to the woman. Just when the first won-
derful touch of passion for this young man came
into Lady Amelia's heart it would be difficult to
say, but that the whole meaning of life was changed
to her in the course of the next few days was
absolutely certain.  She drifted far away from her
customary cold and bitter environment when she felt
herself within the circle of that radiant good-fellow-
ship-that simple, frank, and most pleasant influence
which Francis Heatherington exercised so naturally.
She had never met anyone like him before.
Unconsciously she found herself striving to win
favour from him. The people with whom she was
staying had been sharply disappointed when it had
been made known that the Duchess of Middlesex had
a most severe cold, and that her daughter Lady Amelia
would christen the ship in her enforced absence.
" Such a dull, stuck-up woman!" his hostess had
confided to Sir Francis. "But perhaps you know
her ?" )



<pb n="40"/>
40             A YOUNG MAN
He confessed to ignorance.
"I know the duchess-she is what one might call  i
a real good sort-and the duke I know, too. I dare
say I may have seen Lady Amelia, but I don't re-
member having met her."
"She is so plain! One can hardly imagine she is
the sister of that lovely Princess Wilhelm of Guten-
staadt. And Lady Sophie Bryne-Jones is so pretty,
too! "
"Oh, I know Lady Sophie! Puts on too much
colour for my taste," Sir Francis said.
Lady Amelia put on no colour.
The impression she gave him was that of an austere
-a joyless woman
He found himself studying her in a scarcely con-
scious way. It had amused him to note the frank
sycophantry lavished on this cold, plain woman.
Though she might be a negligible quantity in her
own home, as the daughter of a duke, Lady Amelia
could always command homage in the world outside.
If she had so chosen she could have obtained popu-
larity too, but she lacked absolutely the art of in-
gratiating herself.
It was the fact that she seemed so strangely alone
which had at first attracted Heatherington. Very
consciously he was made aware that Lady Amelia
liked his companionship.
After the little episode of the accident they drifted
insensibly into a friendship, and the more he knew
of her the more the man felt sorry for her. When
they were both back in town he called frequently at
Middlesex House. The duchess loved him, he was so
good to look at and so congenial; they would sit



<pb n="41"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             41
and talk about horses, and all the latest racing topics
by the hour together.
He was a favourite, too, with the duke, who was
terribly deaf, and, in consequence, lived almost as
a recluse in some of the rooms at the back of the
great gloomy London house. Business necessitated
Heatherington being in town as a general rule. He
was a partner in a large exporting house, and went
regularly to the City. When his uncle died he came
into the title and the money too; and the pleasantest
pathways in life were immediately opened out to
him. And the pathway he trod was the road which
led eventually to marriage with Lady Amelia Wittin-
gale.
It was not the duchess, astute as she was, who was
the first to see that an impossibility was about to
happen.
Lady Sophie Bryne-Jones ran up from her palace
in the country for a few days' shopping, and she
startled her mother out of her seven senses by asking
when Sir Francis and Lady Amelia were going to
be married.
The duchess had screamed, and then she had
looked at her plump daughter, who seemed to be
literally made of money so opulent was her appear-
ance.
"Are you mad ?" she inquired. "Frank Heather-
ington marry Amelia! Frank-a handsome love of
a boy like that-throw himself away on Amy! The
idea is preposterous, Sophie! " the mother had said
suddenly. "And if it is a joke, it is not in the best
of taste. Of course, you know very well Amy will
aIever marry now. She is nearly thirty-nine, and has



<pb n="42"/>
42            A YOUNG MAN
recognised long ago that marriage for her is an
impossibility."
Lady Sophie had laughed.
"Sometimes things happen of which you know
nothing, mamma dear," she said demurely. "I I
happen to know that not a fortnight ago Amy refused
a most excellent marriage. Mr. Iscariot told me
himself he had proposed to her, and that she had
refused."
The duchess gasped incredulously.
"Iscariot!  Are you sure?  Why he has three
millions they say!"    I
" Seven! " Lady Sophie Bryne-Jones had amended.
"But it would appear that our dear Amy would not
marry him if he had seventeen. He was horribly dis-
appointed, you see he wanted badly to be your son- 
in-law. Amy herself does not count very much."
The duchess had sat very still. She was thinking,
and once she shivered.
"Such a name and such an awful man! " she mur- 
mured. And then she had pondered a little more,
and Lady Sophie had talked of other things, and
the matter had been dropped, to crop up again, how-
ever, in a most pronounced fashion between Lady 
Amelia and her mother a little later on.
The chance was too extraordinary, too good to
be lost, moreover there was something more than
ambition and a perennial need of money actuating
the older woman when she pressed Mr. Iscariot's pro-
posal upon her daughter. Life would be infinitely
more agreeable with Lady Amelia out of the run of
daily existence. Though she had nothing bright or
delightful to look back upon in her history, it had



<pb n="43"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              43
been reserved for this moment to reveal to Amelia
Wittingale how ugly life could be sometimes.
It was a time of real suffering to her. She might
not be beautiful, but she had her full share of vanity
and more than her share of strong, hard pride; there
was much possible to the Duchess of Middlesex, many
things done by the mother which would have been
an absolute impossibility for Lady Amelia even to
contemplate.
That her mother should permit herself to mix so
freely with people of Iscariot's class was something
the younger woman had always resented, and that
most bitterly. To have such a marriage thrust upon
her was a great shock, a horrible mortification.
The matter worked a breach between herself and
her mother which never would be healed. In this
dark hour Amelia had but one gleam of light, one
solitary pleasure-her friendship with Heatherington.
It would have been difficult for Sir Francis to have
explained why he found himself so often at Middle-
sex House, but any other, who had known and studied
his character, would have gone to the root of the
matter in a moment, From his earliest boyhood
young Heatherington had shown a most extraordinary
degree of heart. Where other boys had been cruel,
he had shown the tenderness of a woman; he was
the readiest champion in the world for the down-
trodden and the oppressed. At school he had been
sneered at and adored, and in later life this quick
sympathy found almost as much expression as in his
younger days.
He had drifted into a kind of intimacy with Amelia
Wittingale because he was genuinely sorry for her.



<pb n="44"/>
44             A YOUNG MAN
He thought her life so grim and grey. It hurt him
to hear her handsome'mother hit Lady Amelia with
laughing yet bitter words, he deprecated the jests
made about her.
Wholly unconscious of the effect produced on her
by his eager desire to shield her from sneers, and his
intention to find good in what others held to be so
poor, Sir Francis lavished the most charming atten-
tions on Lady Amelia. If anyone would have at-
tempted to let him see the danger towards which he
was drifting Sir Francis would have laughed aloud,
so secure did he feel. The thought of more than
friendship, the mere suggestion of marriage with Lady
Amelia would have seemed to him a veritable mad-
ness. 
And yet he embraced that madness.
It was the pitiful sight of Amelia Wittingale in :
tears, the abasement of her proud spirit-which had
retained the delicacy of maidenhood even in approach-
ing middle age-which stung him to stand forward
and champion her.
Acting on the hot impulse of the moment he spoke
words which carried to the woman a significance so
wondrous that heaven itself seemed suddenly to have
come to earth. The passion with which her heart
had been surcharged broke from her, and Francis
Heatherington was holding her in his arms his
acknowledged betrothed before the hot impulse of
generous sympathy had been followed by a sensation
of cold bewilderment, which was not wholly untouched
with a sense of horror.
Another kind of man might have set about at once
to find some loophole of escape from the entangle-
2I1



<pb n="45"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              45
ment which he had put about himself so innocently.
But when Heatherington recalled all that had passed,
when he remembered the amazing revelation of feel-
ing which Amelia had shown, when he realised what
this marriage signified to her, he simply could not
move an inch to free himself.
Not even when Lady Amelia's mother openly spoke
of the engagement as an act of extraordinary folly on
his part, and really gave him the chance of gracefully
backing out of the situation, did he change in his
attitude. The certain knowledge that it was in his
power to bring such sunshine into another person's
life provoked a kind of enthusiastic self-satisfaction
and carried him for the time being out of the realm
of practical reasoning or discrimination.
In those early days of betrothal Lady Amelia had
worn a new guise, she had taken on a new spell of
youth; there had been colour in her faded cheeks
and expression in her eyes.
" Poor fool!" the duchess had said to herself as
she had remarked these significant signs, and for the
first time in her life she had pitied her eldest daughter.
Not that she doubted Sir Francis. She called him
a fool in another way; but she knew he meant very
sincerely to do everything in his power to give happi-
ness to the woman he was about to marry, it was the
certainty that such a marriage could not be anything
but a miserable failure which possessed Lady Amelia's
mother.
However, she had shrugged her shoulders and
had stood on one side, and she had even taken a
great deal of trouble to choose some pretty gowns
-which were quite unsuitable for Lady Amelia to



<pb n="46"/>
46            A YOUNG MAN
wear-and one day in late September there had 
been a very quiet wedding in town and the newly 
made husband and wife had started for the honey-
moon which had terminated this day with their 
arrival at Winchbourne Court.
Perhaps if the Duchess of Middlesex could have
been present with the husband and wife in this the
first hour they spent in their own home, she would 
have found some satisfaction in assuring herself that
her prognostications of evil had been quickly realised. 
Most certain it is that her eyes would have seen that :
which Francis Heatherington did not even imagine 
-the poignant fact that the glamour had slipped 
suddenly from his wife's outlook, and that the future i
in its bleak truth stared her in the face menacingly!
:.
'!i



<pb n="47"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              47
CHAPTER IV.
ANTHONY SHARPUS sat down to his usual solitary
dinner just at the moment that the guests at the
Court were being marshalled into their places by
the Heatherington butler. The room in which he sat
was unpretentious, and even shabby, yet with very
little care it could have been made charming.
For it was old, very old, the beams which ran
across the low-roofed ceiling were blackened with
age, and the fireplace was built under a kind of
arch, with oaken seats on each side which spelt for
warmth and cosiness on a wintry evening.
Mr. Sharpus ate his dinner in a perfunctory kind of
way, he seemed glad to dismiss the food and take
up his pipe.  Outside it was cheerless enough, the
wind beat the rain against the house in pitiless
fashion. The young man-he was young though his
dark hair was flecked with white-called to the maid
as, having cleared the table, she was leaving the
room.
"Are the children asleep?"
"I don't know, sir. Shall I go and ask?"
He nodded his head and the woman went upstairs.
She was back again directly.



<pb n="48"/>
48             A YOUNG MAN
"They're off, sir, sound, nurse says."
He thanked the speaker with a smile. He was I
extraordinarily attractive when he smiled. Alone,
he lit his pipe, turned his chair to the cheery blaze 
of the fire, and then opened some newspapers which
had come for him by the second post, there was a
letter too.
He had already read this once, and he now read
it a second time. There were four pages covered
with fine writing; at the close of the letter after
the signature, a sentence had been added hurriedly:
"Putting aside everything else, when you tire
of the responsibility, as you are bound to do, you
may remember that there was an opportunity open
to you to rid yourself of this responsibility, and
you may wish to avail yourself of this opportunity
when it is too late."
Anthony Sharpus tore the letter into small pieces
and then flung them into the fire.
"Never, my dear woman!" he said under his
breath. "Never!"
He seemed a little restless. With his pipe between i
his teeth he moved about the room. Once he stood,
and stared out of the window into the dark stormy '
night, and once he opened the casement and let 
the wet wind rush in on him. This touch of vigorous
nature seemed to revive him. He went back to his
chair and took up the newspapers.
But he did not read very much; he began to
think again; and this time his thoughts were very:
pleasant ones. He had a vision of Patricia Prentice 
before his eyes. He had grown to find something 
like delight in watching this girl flit about the little



<pb n="49"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             49
world in which he now lived. She radiated the grey
autumnal days with her happy youth, she was like
the wind itself in her freshness; her beauty had the
fragrance of a wood-violet.
"And she is such a child!" he mused. He re-
membered her "Oh, bother! " when he had given
her her sister's message that morning, and laughed
at the remembrance.
"The children will adore her. But she won't come
here, that other girl won't let her," he mused.
He had quickly realised Sheila's very determined
objection to himself. This would have carried no
sting save that with her sister against him his chance
of a friendship prospering with Patricia would be
spoiled, and little by little of late he had found
himself feeling the need of just that bright, warm
sympathetic comradeship which Patricia Prentice
could give so easily.
"It would be amusing," he mused to himself
lazily, "to know the opinion these people down here
have of me. I am afraid if Miss Prentice is any-
thing to go by, my reputation must be pretty bad.
Well, at least I shall serve one useful purpose if I
keep them well supplied with a subject of gossip."
A tap at the door disturbed his thoughts.
" Come in," he called, but no one answered. After
a little pause the rapping continued.
Sharpus sprang to his feet
" Meggy! " he said under his breath.
He went hurriedly to the door, and there on the
mat, clad. only in a pink flannel nightgown, was a
little child.  The man stooped and gathered the
small figure in his arms.
4



<pb n="50"/>
50             A YOUNG MAN
"My sweetheart!" he exclaimed. "What are you
doing there? They told me you were asleep; and
you are frozen, literally frozen, Meggy darling."
" I want you," said Meggy, and she nestled into his
arms. "I only want you."
He sat down in the chair and held her tightly while
he stirred the fire into a blaze, and then began to
chafe the two small naked feet. His eyes devoured
the child with love. She was so beautiful, rarely
beautiful, her skin was so fair, so soft, her eyes so
big and dark, and her hair wondrous. Though the
nurse had tied it up in curl rags, there was still a
mass loose on the brows and curling about the nape
of the delicate neck
"I've been crying," she announced suddenly, "'cos
I wanted you, Tony." She turned and kissed him
on the chin, and then the shoulder. "You're such
a duck! " she said.
He caressed her and said all manner of endearing
things, and then he remembered his duty and
preached platitudes.
"All little girls of seven go to sleep when they
are put to bed," he decided.
Meggy looked at him    and then gravely sur-
veyed her pink toes nestling in the hollow of his
hand.
"Do they?" she asked. "Poor things!" She
laughed and then she sighed. "You said you was
coming up again, and you didn't  I listened all the
time, nurse thought I was asleep. Nurse is a silly!
And when she was abstince I got out of bed and
come down. And you aren't a bit cross, are you,
Tony ?"



<pb n="51"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             51
He pretended to scowl, but it was a failure, and
with terrible weakness he produced biscuits and
even some chocolate, and, then he rolled her up in
a rug and carried her back up the stairs to the warm
bed she had discarded. Nurse, who was reading by
the fire, exclaimed a good many times as she saw
the master of the house enter and realised the nature
of the bundle he carried.
" Oh, Miss Meggy, now, for shame! You promised
to be so good if I'd let you sleep alone, and this
is how you set a example to Master Edmund and
Miss Baby."
Meggy shrugged her shoulders.
"When they're sleeping there isn't no use wastin'
time in being good. I'm tired of exampling all day
-Tony! " She clung to him after she was tucked
up. " I want to tell you a' secret." She dragged him
lower, and into his ear she whispered, "There's a
poor fairy crying outside somewhere. She's miser-
able because it's wet and cold-that's what kept
me awake reely."
"I'll go and find her and send her back to fairy-
land," the man promised gently. It was quite against
the rules of any well-conducted nursery, but he
stayed kneeling by the cot till sleep at last lighted
on the child's eyelids, and the grip of the little hand
relaxed.
When he was downstairs he remembered his
promise, and with a smile he put on his coat and
cap and then let himself out into the dark wet night.
The wind had died down suddenly, and Sharpus
found it almost pleasant out of the house. He
4*



<pb n="52"/>
52             A YOUNG MAN
strolled on up to the road which ran past the farmstead
which he had rented about a year before. It gave
him a thrill of pleasure to turn and see the light
gleaming from the window where the children slept. '
The knowledge that they were so near warmed him.
He loved all children, but these three were naturally
before and above all others.
He stood a moment at the gateway. It was 
growing late; in the distance lay the village,
and there the lights were extinguished already. It
was dark, with that shroudedness, that weighty dark-
ness, of night in the country, but gradually this
baffling gloom lifted-his eyes, growing accustomed,
could see almost clearly. He opened the gate after
awhile and stepped into the roadway. Rain was
falling intermittently. Suddenly a bicycle flashed
past him and someone called out cheerily: "Good-
night." He had not the least idea who it was that
had hailed him, but he stood and watched the lamp
of the machine dance will-o'-the-wisp fashion down
the road to the village. He was not actively think-
ing; there were times when he discarded thought,
when he just abandoned himself to those things, and
there were a few, which made for pleasure in his
present circumstances. For instance, the freedom- '
the untrammelled movement of his daily life here in
this quiet place, and then the silence of the country,
especially at night. There was something rebuking
to him in the lofty silence of this world so out of
the way of man and man's craving ambitions and
hustling endeavours. He strolled back inside the
gate again, and as he closed it, he rested his arms
on the top and leaned his chin on them.



<pb n="53"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              53
"If it could be always like this!" he said to him-
self dreamily.
But shadowing the amazing delight of this tranquil
and dreamy sort of existence lay the knowledge that
this must come to an end, that he was only pausing
before pushing on again to take his share in the
hustling endeavours and the never satisfied ambi-
tions.
He sighed once in an involuntary way and then
he roused himself. Suddenly on the stillness of the
night there came the sound of hurrying feet. Some-
one was approaching the gate, and as those fleet
footsteps drew nearer, Sharpus caught the sound of
a sobbing breath, like one would breathe who was in
sore grief or whose physical powers were being taxed
too severely. Whilst he was in the act of moving,
a figure went past the gate so quickly as to be half
running. He suddenly climbed the gate and bending
forward, looked after that slim young figure. He
had not seen her face, but he recognised the coat
she wore, and, above all, the way she moved was
familiar to him
He stepped down and turning abruptly, went down
the path to the house. He was conscious of a curious
sensation, predominate in which rankled anger. It
was unreasonable of him, of that he was fully aware,
to object to anything which Patricia did, but he did
object. He was impressed most unpleasantly by the
fact that this late excursion must have been taken
unknown to her mother and the others in her home,
L and there had been an element of nervous excite-
j ment about her movements which left another dis-
agreeable impression. Just for a moment he felt
t'         



<pb n="54"/>
54              A YOUNG MAN
tempted to run after her, to offer his services to see
her back safely to Pitt Place, but he quickly saw the
folly of this.
"And after all, it is no business of mine what she
does! " he said. But that was where he was quite
wrong.
I
I
i
ij
')i
'**'<



<pb n="55"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             55
CHAPTER V.
PATSY found the Winchbourne Court dinner party a
very tedious affair.
The idea of this entertainment had emanated from
the fertile brain of Mrs. Bartingale, who had herself
written to Sir Francis suggesting that in her opinion
quite the most excellent way for Lady Amelia to be
presented to all those people among whom she would
naturally mingle when staying at the Court would
be for a dinner to be given by himself and his wife the
night of their arrival. Sir Francis had written back
and consented to this arrangement with his customary
good nature, and only realised when everything had
been signed and sealed that his wife disliked the
plan exceedingly and very naturally.
It was a new matter for the man to have to consider
a second person in the everyday details of his every-
day existence; and, in truth, the significance of his
married state had hardly commenced to dawn on his
mind till this day had come, a day fraught with other
awakenings and far-reaching influences.
And it must be confessed that as he stood with his
wife waiting for their guests to arrive Sir Francis
heartily regretted his acquiescence to the wishes of



<pb n="56"/>
56             A YOUNG MAN
the rector's wife. It would have been infinitely better
in every sense for Lady Amelia to have prepared
herself gradually for those social duties which would 
naturally fall to her lot as mistress of Winchbourne
Court.
He felt as though he were treading on new and,
perhaps, on insecure ground at each step he took
now.
There was a sense of irritation pricking him,
and his wife's cold bearing served unconsciously to 
strengthen this irritation. 
He stole an occasional glance at her as they stood
by the fireside.
Lady Amelia had the most unbridelike look. She 
wore one of her old evening dresses-a black satin,
which had done loyal service in the past. The lace
on the bodice was yellow with age. She wore no
jewels; only a black velvet band round her thin
throat, fastened with a buckle. She was indubitably
a lady, but the man fretted for the first time at her
very definite unloveliness. He wanted her to have
some trace of feminine allurement; she need not, so
he felt, necessarily be very young to possess some
such attraction. 
A cold feeling of dismay permeated his mind as
he looked at her this night, a dismay that was so
strong as to be a physical sensation.
" You are not wearing any diamonds ?" he queried,
after a pause.
Lady Amelia looked at him. She was miserably,
acutely conscious of the fundamental cause of that
rasping note in his voice, of the nervousness which
made him so restless. She grew paler, and her face



<pb n="57"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             57
had a pinched look; she answered him with a little
laugh.
"Diamonds! My dear Frank, we leave diamonds
in the country to the parvenu millionaire's wife.
Sophie, I believe, turns herself nowadays into a
raree show on the slightest provocation; but there
is a world of difference between Sophie and
me."
"Something is expected of us," Sir Francis
answered, a little shortly.
But further discussion had been prevented by the
arrival of Mrs. Prentice and Patricia.
Just for an instant Francis Heatherington's heart
had stood still as he had watched them enter. Though
he had dreaded her coming, still he had longed for it,
and had expected, of course, to see Sheila. His dis-
appointment was so acute at her non-appearance that
it was with the greatest difficulty he spoke pleasantly
and went through the form   of welcoming Mrs.
Prentice. He did not kiss Patsy a second time. The
sisters were, strictly speaking, not very much alike,
except in colouring and height, yet it seemed to
him that the young girl was really Sheila for the
moment. Patsy had changed so much during the
last year. She wore a long gown, and her hair was
dressed high.
"Why have you grown up? " he asked her, a little
unsteadily.
"Ask mamma," Patricia answered; "it's all her
fault I wanted to stay in the nursery all my life,
but she would not let me have my way."
She felt inclined to be flippant. She had always
chatted in this nonsensical way with Frank Heather-



<pb n="58"/>
58             A YOUNG MAN 
ington, but she supposed this would have to end now!
It would be hard to have to treat him with diffidencei
Lady Amelia and Mrs. Prentice sat and made;
laboured conversation. They were the same type of
woman-with this difference, that Patricia's mother
had been very handsome, and still retained some of. 
her good looks. Like Lady Amelia, however, she
lacked all connection with coquetry. She wore hard-:
looking clothes, and was never seen without a stiff 
widow's cap and aggressive white streamers.  As 
she made elaborate apologies for her elder daughter's 
absence, Sir Francis drew Patricia a little apart.
"What is wrong with Sheila? Is she really ill, 
or only bored?" He caught his breath, and then-
said, without waiting for an answer: " I quite thought 
she would have come to-night, Patsy."
Patricia said sincerely she was sorry. The gaiety 
went out of her voice as she spoke now. It had not
been a very spontaneous note in the commencement, 
but it would have easily deceived those whom she '
was going to meet. When Sir Francis probed the :
question of Sheila's absence in this deliberate fashion, '
however, Patsy was reminded very sharply of that
anxious trouble about her sister which she wanted 
so badly to forget.
"Sheila gets such horrid colds, she has to be care- t
ful, you know; and she got so wet this afternoon.
It was really I who persuaded her to go to bed,
Frank. Don't be cross with her."
The rector and his wife were announced at that |
moment, and Sir Francis had to go across the room 
and receive them. He felt as though his heart was
on fire.



<pb n="59"/>
FROM THE COUNTRY.                 59
"Cross with her! " he said to himself.
Assuredly it was a dull evening. Gradually a
sense of depression spread over the assembled
company.
After dinner Patricia sang at Sir Francis's request.
She went through the form of submitting this pro-
posal to Lady Amelia, who only smiled in a forced
manner and murmured something of a non-committal
nature. She had shown no sign of preference
towards any of her guests, but Patricia was un-
pleasantly conscious that she, at least, was utterly
out of reach of this woman's good feeling; and, in
a sense, the girl was sorry. For with that quick,
heartfelt sympathy which was so characteristic of
her, she felt a thrill of pity for this middle-aged
woman, who would be discussed and criticised in
such a merciless fashion, and who had about her an
element of pathos which was very touching to
Patricia.
"If Frank were only a little older, or if he would
look older than he is, it would not be so bad," the
girl mused to herself.
She sang her prettiest, and made a delightful figure
as she stood, slim and tall, in her white frock, close
to the piano, where Emily Bartingale, her devoted
admirer, sat playing the accompaniments.
It had become the rule with Mrs. Bartingale to
object to Patricia's undoubted musical gifts, but this
night she broke through this rule, and was the first
to lead the applause when the songs ended.
For once, at least, Patsy's songs had served a
useful purpose.
Not that the rector's wife intended to let this



<pb n="60"/>
60             A YOUNG MAN
first impression of Lady Amelia Heatherington sway
her from that very long-established theory of hers
that dukes and all belonging to them could do no
wrong. She was, however, forced, unwillingly, to
admit that the rector had been right when he had
protested against this compulsory and early hos-
pitality on the part of the Heatheringtons.
She saw now that it would have been altogether :
better to have waited. Then Lady Amelia would
have had time to recover from her fatigue.  She 
could, of course, have made a better impression if 
time had been given her to prepare herself a little
with that good intent. As it was, Mrs. Bartingale
could only imagine that the trousseau had not yet
reached the Court. No other explanation could
soften the shock of the bride's shabby appearance.
The evening was brought to a close very early.
Mrs. Prentice and her daughter were the first to go.
It was an oppressive homeward drive.
Patsy always declared that she suffocated in the
funereal old brougham, unearthed from the stables
on these occasions. She certainly had a stifled sensa-
tion that night. Her mother had the usual list of
faults to be condemned.  She disapproved of the
way Patricia had dressed her hair; she made cold,
critical remarks about the songs sung; and she would
have succeeded in taking all the light and pleasure
out of the girl if Patsy had not already felt too tired
to be influenced in any way. In fact, had she spoken
out the truth she would have confessed she was
really rather glad that her mother should find so
much to talk about.    She dreaded questions-
questions which she could not possibly answer.



<pb n="61"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              6i
The rector's wife had, of course, discussed Sheila's
absence.
"She was looking very well to-day, I thought. I
am afraid Sheila is getting lazy. Young people
nowadays are not made to exert themselves as they
were when I was a girl."
"What horrid days those must have been! " Patsy
had said, with weary indifference to Mrs. Bartingale's
frown. "I'm so glad I'm a girl now. We have a
much better time all round, don't we, Emily?"
Miss Bartingale gasped a little. She adored Patsy,
but there were many times when the object of her
adoration caused her to suffer a good deal.
When Pitt Place was reached Patricia had to escort
her mother up to her room and to act as a maid-
a very trying occupation at all times, but worse this
night than at any other.
The moment she was free she hastened to her
own room, and got into her dressing-gown with all
the haste possible.  She wanted to satisfy herself
that Sheila was better.  She would creep in very
softly so that she should not disturb her sister. But
when she reached Sheila's door she had a disap-
pointment; it was still locked.
She paused a moment, half hoping that Sheila
might have heard her step and her touch on the
handle, but there was no sound from within, and so
Patsy stole away again and shut herself in her own
little room. But she was far, far away from being
sleepy.
Her mind was literally obsessed with anxious
thought of her sister. There was no fire in her room
-such luxuries were not allowed at Pitt Place-but



<pb n="62"/>
62            A YOUNG MAN
Patsy put a shawl about her shoulders, and sat :
crouched up in a heap on the end of her bed, think-
ing, thinking, thinking
Round the walls of her room were scattered in- 
numerable photographs and sketches, mementoes for
the most part of that period spent away from her
old home-portraits of the students with whom she
had lived and worked, one or two pencil drawings -
of herself, a page of original composition torn from :
the album of a boy who promised to be famous, and 
some photographs taken by herself. 
All these things had been treasures to Patsy, and !
had made for her any amount of pleasure till to-
night; and now she almost hated them because they
reminded her of that long spell of separation from
Sheila, that time in which something-she knew not
of what nature-had grown up in the pathway of their
loving comradeship, something which hung like a
blight over the youth of her sister and which had-or 
so it seemed to Patsy-culminated this day in some
outward and visible form of trouble at once mys-
terious and alarming.
Crouching up in impish fashion, and wrapping her
shawl more closely about her, Patsy went over and
over in her mind many little matters and scenes
which had impressed her oddly during the last year.
Her sister's strange and perpetual irritability had
been, perhaps, the chief of these things, but then 
again, the curious depression which had fallen at
times on Sheila seemed to her charged with
unpleasant significance now.
"Is it anything to do with Frank? Somehow he
upset me to-night. Why did he ask so many ques-



<pb n="63"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             63
tions about Sheila? Oh, I do hope she is not fretting
about Frank. That would be too awful, and some-
how," Patsy mused on restlessly, "it doesn't seem as
if it could be that. Sheila never cared for Frank.
Why she has told me, over and over again, that
he bored her to death. I am not so sure about him.
Really, he was so odd to-night, but--
The chiming of a clock from the stables broke the
train of thought.
"Good heavens!    Twelve o'clock!  If mother
could know I had been burning two candles for nearly
an hour, I wonder what she would say? I might
just as well have got into bed, but I'm such an
idiot! "
Before she extinguished her candles Patsy tidied
up her room, and put away her simple finery. Then
she picked up Sheila's portrait from its place of
honour on her mantel-shelf, and kissed it tenderly.
As she put it back a little unmounted photograph
fluttered from the shelf to the ground. Patsy picked
this up, and before tucking it away in the pages of a
book she looked at it awhile.
- It was a snapshot she had taken one day of
Anthony Sharpus on horseback, as he had been
waiting in the courtyard of Pitt Place, and it was,
as sometimes these chance photographs are, an ex-
cellent likeness.
Patsy's thoughts travelled to him as she got into
bed. Vaguely she derived a sense of pleasure and
comfort, too, in remembering him. Sheila's rather
disagreeable words about this man brought her now
a sense of sharp regret.
"I'm sure he is really nice. Sheila doesn't know



<pb n="64"/>
64             A YOUNG MAN
him. If she did, she would like him, I know," Patricia
said to herself as she snuggled under the bedclothes.
"I don't see why there should be any mystery about
him!   He seems just an ordinary man-no, not
exactly ordinary-a much nicer sort of man than the
ordinary man," she amended; "more interesting than
anybody else about here, that's one thing certain. I
like him!"   Patricia confided to herself sleepily.
"Other people may say what they like, and think
what they will. I like Mr. Sharpus, and I mean to
go on liking him."



<pb n="65"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              65
CHAPTER VI.
DESPITE Mrs. Bartingale's loud-mouthed apprecia-
tion of Lady Amelia Heatherington and all her ways,
there was a general consensus of opinion round and
about Winchbourne that Sir Francis's wife was un-
interesting and unsatisfactory.
All sorts of hopes had been aroused when it was
first known that Winchbourne Court was to have a
mistress.
No one, of course, expected the Heatheringtons to
live there indefinitely, but as it was agreed that the
house would be open a good many months in the
year, a certain amount of hospitality and entertain-
ment was naturally anticipated. Almost immediately,
however, the younger generation realised that their
chances of having good times at Winchbourne Court
had withered and died down. Beyond driving round
and leaving cards in return for those showered upon
her, Lady Amelia showed no disposition whatsoever
to mingle with the Winchbourne people.
Even after church she never stayed in the porch
to shake hands with anyone; she just walked through
the assembled congregation, and got into her carriage,
"lookin' sour enough-God knows!-to turn all
5



<pb n="66"/>
66             A YOUNG MAN
the milk in the village!" as Mrs. Mitchinson, the
doctor's wife, said.
Both the doctor and his wife were free-lances;
they spoke out their minds irrespective of class or
person. They were forgiven much, however, because
they were both such genuine, good creatures.
Childless and fairly well off for such simple folk,
they competed, albeit in all innocence, for that place
and popularity which the rector's wife considered
should belong alone to herself, and, perhaps, her
husband.
Naturally, Mrs. Mitchinson's outspoken words
about Lady Amelia provoked remonstrance from
Mrs. Bartingale
"I think it must always be remembered," she
said in the tone with which she reprimanded the
school-children, "that Lady Amelia will naturally
hold herself a little aloof from intimacy with-with
most of us." The "us" was a concession and a
painful one. "She has been accustomed to such a
different sphere."
To which Mrs. Mitchinson had retorted:
"Rubbish! " And had added: "And worse than
rubbish! Snobbery! Lady Amelia may be a duke's
daughter a hundred times over-that makes no
difference. She has chosen to come and live here
among us, and she ought to realise certain things are
expected of her."
The doctor's wife had ended her speech by ex-
pressing profoundest pity for Sir Francis.  "Al-
though," she took care to explain, "he has only
himself to thank for whatever comes. The man must
have been mad to marry as he has married! "



<pb n="67"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             67
And this thought, less violently expressed-in fact,
in most cases not openly expressed at all-was the
general feeling which prevailed. By reason of con-
trast, no doubt, Frank Heatherington had never
seemed so handsome, so delightful, so altogether
desirable as he now did. Susceptible hearts-and
they abounded in Winchbourne and its neighbour-
hood-rendered him the readiest homage, and each
time he was seen with his wife this offering of spon-
taneous sympathy became more and more determined.
As the autumn was well advanced, all sorts of
preparations were put in hand for Christmas.
Mrs. Bartingale had many faults, but she was at
least a real help-mate to the rector, and had boundless
energy and an unflagging devotion to her duties.
She inaugurated sewing teas, among other things:
these were about the only entertainments to which
Mrs. Prentice allowed her daughters to go unpro-
testingly.
Mrs. Bartingale went a step further in the winter
arrangements this year.
She took a walk to Winchbourne Court; and she
laid before Lady Amelia a proposition that some of
these charitable meetings should be held at the Court
itself.
" Old Lady Heatherington used to be so good about
this, and took so much interest in everything. She
sewed quite wonderfully, and never used glasses till
within a few months of her death."
Lady Amelia expressed the required astonishment,
and fell in at once with Mrs. Bartingale's suggestion.
In consequence, the rector's wife went away more
than ever a loyal adherent
5*



<pb n="68"/>
68             A YOUNG MAN
"She looked so nice, so simply dressed in blue
serge with linen collar and cuffs; she has such
charm!" declaimed Mrs. Bartingale when she
reached home.
There was only one person who dared to laugh
at this statement, and that person was Patricia, who
had happened into the rectory to try over a couple
of songs with Emily-songs that were to be sung
at the concert at the village club a week hence.
"Isn't it wonderful what our eyes can see when
they want to?" she asked in an audible whisper.
Not that Patricia was ready to join in the acid
criticism on Lady Amelia-in truth that feeling of
pity, which had come to her the first time she and
Frank Heatherington's wife had met, clung to her.
But Patricia could not stand anything which flavoured
of sycophancy. She hummed through her songs, and
Mrs. Bartingale listened with unwilling admiration.
She considered Patricia's musical gifts something in
the nature of a snare, yet she never could deny the
sweetness of the girl's voice.
"I hope," she said, as the piano was closed and
Patsy prepared to go home--"I do hope, my dear
Patricia, that I may count on you and Sheila to attend
these teas at the Court I confess I am very dis-
appointed that your sister has failed me so much
this autumn."
"Sheila isn't a bit well," Patricia said. "I really
think she wants change of air. I wish mother
would let her go to Aunt Judith for a little while."
" This is the most bracing air in the United King-
dom," Mrs. Bartingale said.
But Patsy only laughed.



<pb n="69"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              69
"Then it is some sort of other air which Sheila
wants."
"Maltine taken three times a day after meals is
an excellent kind of tonic," was Mrs. Bartingale's
farewell remark as Patsy took her leave.
The girl walked away briskly from the rectory.
As she left the village she was passed by a brougham
from the Court In it was Sir Francis, and from
the glimpse she had of the luggage and the gun-
cases and the golf-sticks, Patricia guessed, of course,
that he was going away for a few days. She waved
her hand to him, and he leaned out of the window
and stopped the carriage.
"Can't I give you a lift?" he asked.
Patricia shook her head.
"I want a walk I have been at the rectory, and
I always want fresh air after a dose of Mrs. Bartingale.
Where are you off to, Frank?"
He told her that he was going to join the Duke
of Middlesex's party of guns in Scotland.
"And meet my brothers-in-law, or at least one of
them," he observed, with a smile and a grimace. " I
shall be back in the inside of a week. I wish you
would come along, Patsy."
"I'd come like a shot if it wasn't for mamma.
Can't you imagine the few remarks she would make if
she heard of such an exploit ?"
"What would that matter? What does anything
matter, really?" queried Sir Francis.
There was restlessness in his voice and in his
general look. Sheila's name was burning on his lips,
yet he dared not utter it. He had a longing to keep
Patsy standing near him simply because she had been



<pb n="70"/>
70             A YOUNG MAN
in close contact with Sheila, and because she carried
about with her a touch of that influence which was
working so disastrously upon him. It was really this
which was driving him away. He had none of
Sheila's composure.
Her indifference when they met was so assured that
it staggered the man.  There were days, indeed,
when he could have persuaded himself that it was
merely the old order of things brought back again,
and that that one transcendent moment of heart to
heart revelation, that amazing confession which had
been declared by Sheila's eyes, by her trembling
hand and her quivering lips, existed merely as an
effort of his imagination. But these were only occa-
sional days. At other times the truth was with him
in painful clearness, and was both a joy beyond
description and an agony to him.
Patricia noted the change in him most dearly
this afternoon. It amazed her to realise how glad
she was he was going away.
"I hope you will have no end of a good time,
Frank," she said.
Sir Francis gripped her hand.
"You are a dear little soul, Patsy," he said; "and
it's about time your good days began to set in."
"I am not so little, and I'm not complaining.
Now, ta-ta, Frank! You want to catch the 3.50, I
know. Well, you won't catch it if you don't hurry."
She stepped back, the horses started Sir Francis
continued to lean out of the window. He said some-
thing but his words were lost Yet Patricia divined
that he was speaking of Sheila
"Oh, my goodness!" she said to herself, as she



<pb n="71"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              71
walked on.   "What is coming to everything?
Nothing seems to be what it ought to be. It would
be funny if it wasn't a bit serious. I wish Frank and
Lady Amelia would go away altogether. If Sheila
could only realise how foolish Frank can be she
would have more to worry her. It is maddening of
him to wait till he is married before he finds out what
a darling Sheila is. Why on earth couldn't he have
done that long before.  I know mother always ex-
pected him to propose to Sheila, and, though she
would die before saying this, that she hates his
marriage like poison. Well, Sheila was there, and
I do believe now she would have married him, but
he must needs go off and get another wife, and
then when he comes back he lets me see any-
how that he cares for Sheila with all his heart and
soul. It's just like a play or a book. Oh, what
wouldn't Mrs. Bartingale give to have just an idea
of what I know! It would be the time of her life! "
Patsy's way home led past the farm where Anthony
Sharpus lived. She looked about her with uncon-
scious eagerness to see some sign of him. It was
days since they had met. For once her wish was
gratified. He was walking briskly up from the farm-
house to the high road.
Patricia paused and hailed him
"It's ages and ages since I have seen you," she
greeted him.  "Where have you been hiding?
Have you forgotten you invited me to tea? I have
been expecting to have that tea and hot scones-I
know you must have hot scones and delicious other
things for tea, things we never have at home-all
this long weary week, and instead of that you have



<pb n="72"/>
72             A YOUNG MAN
been eating the cakes and drinking the tea, and
generally enjoying yourself, and I have been quite
forgotten."
Anthony Sharpus took her hand because it was
outstretched, but he only just touched it Her merry
look, her bright, frank expression and even her beauty,
incensed him.
"You are quite wrong," he said. "You have not
been forgotten."
There was such a strange note in his voice, such
constraint (it seemed to her condemnatory constraint)
in his manner, that Patricia drew back from him
suddenly.



<pb n="73"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              73
CHAPTER VII.
IT was no new thing for her to be reprimanded-and
that sharply enough-by her mother for her frivolity;
indeed, in her mother's presence the girl very rarely
let her bright and merry spirit have vent in expres-
sion. Mrs. Prentice was devoid of humour, and
Patsy's way of seeing the comic side of most things
made no appeal to her. It had been the freedom
from such constant and harsh repression which had
made her sojourn abroad so delightful to Patricia.
She had long since ceased to wonder at her mother's
dour outlook on life. If truth be told, she had more
than once pitied her mother because Mrs. Prentice
was seemingly shut away from all that gladness
which the mere fact of living could signify to her-
self at times, and she had grown to accept her
mother's constant fault-finding as a necessary evil-
something which, if annoying, was also harmless.
And assuredly nothing her mother had ever said
to her had brought that chill and yet hot feeling of
mortification which now swept her about It was
actually the first time Patricia had really felt ashamed
of her light-hearted trick of talking nonsense.
She drew back very quickly.



<pb n="74"/>
74             A YOUNG MAN
"You must, of course, take all I say with a grain
of salt. I am famous-as perhaps you know already
-for talking foolishly. Naturally, I did not in the
least expect you to ask me to tea"
He opened the gate and passed out into the road.
"That is hardly an exact fact, is it?" he asked,
"seeing that I did invite you the last time we
met"
He walked beside her. She had turned, and with
some petulance was continuing on her homeward
way.
"Well," Patsy said, "we all make mistakes some-
times, you know."
He assented to this, and found himself looking
at her with far more eagerness than he realised.
She looked just like a child-a vexed child. It was
difficult to reconcile this picture of her with that
other-that painful picture of a girl hurrying through
the darkness of the night evidently oppressed with
fear and trouble. He paused a moment and then
he said:
"I should have been delighted to welcome you,
Miss Patricia, but two of the children have not been
well, and their nurse has insisted on keeping them
very quiet for a time."
Patricia's anger was fading away.
"Oh, poor little lambs!" she said. "I do hate to
think of children being ill. They ought never to
know what illness means." She spoke with some-
thing of her usual spontaneity, and yet there was a
difference-a sense of restraint, which he caught at
once. Evidently his manner had conveyed even
more reproof than he had been aware of. A quick



<pb n="75"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             75
revulsion of feeling came to him; he was conscious
of a sharp and definite rush of self-reproach.
"What right have I to judge her so sharply? " he
asked himself.
With a subdued look on her glowing face, Patricia
impressed him with that pathos which he felt when
Meggy got into trouble and he was called upon to
deliver judgment and sanction punishment
And in a more definite way there stole about his
heart that penetrating influence which had belonged
hitherto entirely to those dear and helpless little
creatures who were shut up in their nursery in the
farm below.
Away from her Sharpus had found it possible to
deal very hardly with Patricia and her peculiar doings,
but now that he saw her again he ceased entirely
to question or to condemn.
"They are not very ill, happily," he said, answer-
ing her after another pause, " only we have to be so
careful with them-with Meggy especially."
"Meggy! What a duck of a name!" Patricia
said. Unconsciously her gaiety stole back to her.
She felt, as she afterwards confessed to herself,
exactly as a dog may feel who, after incurring the
displeasure of his master, is taken back to favour
again. "Aren't you awfully happy now you have
your children with you, Mr. Sharpus?"
He sighed a little.
"They are very precious, but a great anxiety."
Suddenly he stopped.
"Look here," he said, "would you like to come
and see them now? It is just tea-time, and I believe
we could produce some sort of hot cakes."



<pb n="76"/>
76            A YOUNG MAN
The girl coloured.
"Oh, it's awfully good of you, Mr. Sharpus, but
if you will let me come another time, I think now
I ought to hurry home; it is getting late. See! it is
quite dark!"
"All right," Sharpus said. "I will walk up to the
gate of Pitt Place with you."
She accepted his escort, and chattered away briskly
as they went. Still, she was not as she had been,
and the man felt as though he had lost something
immeasurably precious; his reproach was doubly
bitter.
If she had questioned him he would have felt
better. It was typical of Patricia that she went to
the root of things. A day or so ago he felt con-
vinced she would have asked him frankly what the
matter was, and why he had met her so coldly, but
it was a new Patricia beside whom he now walked.
The old one had drawn back, and was hidden,
perhaps for ever, behind a barrier of new-born
conventionality.
Sharpus bit his lip savagely as he realised this.
It was decidedly a confession of weakness on his
part, but he found himself quite unable to hold the
condemnatory attitude he had maintained all this
week.
Patricia in her turn noticed that though he made
an effort to fall back into his former easy manner,
it was an effort, and a little sorrowful feeling settled
in her heart.
"Of course, he wasn't exactly a friend," she said
to herself, "but he was going to be one, and now I
have lost him. I do wonder what has happened!



<pb n="77"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             77
Perhaps Mrs. Bartingale has been making mischief,
or perhaps mother has been saying something un-
pleasant"
"It's awfully good of you to come all this way,
Mr. Sharpus," she said out loud, when the big and
shabby gates of Pitt Place hove in sight, "but, you
know, I could really have come quite well by myself.
I am a most independent person-at least, when I
can be! My mother every now and then considers
she must interfere and put a stop to my rampaging;
but nothing cures me really, and on the first oppor-
tunity I take my liberty in my hands, and I am off
again."
" The world here is circumscribed; you ought to go
farther afield if you cannot live without adventures."
His tone was stiff again. This harmless speech
of hers had brought back to him his former feelings
with a rush; it appeared to him rather painfully in
the nature of an explanation-an explanation pro-
voked, it might be, by the possibility of his having
been remarked that dark, wet night, a fact which
had not till now even entered into his thoughts.
"You mean I ought to go away to travel? Oh,
don't I wish I could! I would fly away from here
with the wings of a dove, if only I had half a chance.
Is it horrid of me, I wonder, to wish to get away
from my old home ? "
She held out her hand and said "Good-bye."
Sharpus just touched the hand for an instant, and
then, taking off his cap, turned on his heel.
Patricia, seeing him go, called to him a little un-
steadily:
"You will ask me to tea another time, won't you? "



<pb n="78"/>
78             A YOUNG MAN
But she ran away hurriedly before he had time to
answer her.
It was quite dark in the heavily shrubbed path-
way from the big gates down to the house, and
Patricia generally ran the whole distance.
"I always think something or someone is behind
me! " she had once declared, when her mother scolded
her for arriving breathless.
Whereupon she had been forced to listen to a
long disquisition on the folly of encouraging imagina-
tion and the sin of believing in the supernatural.
" Oh, I'm not afraid of ghosts-at least, not much;
it's people I'm afraid of. And that yew hedge is
so awfully thick, mother, a whole family of burglars
could live there with impunity."
Sharpus had paused to watch her fleet away.
Once again his anger had melted, and his lips smiled.
Perhaps, after all, he was making a very big mountain
out of a ridiculously small molehill. Perhaps, if he
had questioned her, he would have discovered that
it had been merely some mischievous escapade which
had taken her out so late that night.
There was a delicious suggestion of irresponsi-
bility about Patricia, and with it a contradictory sug-
gestion of womanliness-of that sympathy which
might be termed maternal
"How she would adore Meggy," he said to him-
self.
To him the three children were always summed
up in Meggy. The boy, of course, had his own small
kingdom, and the baby was adorable, but Meggy
came always first; and between the child and the
girl he had just left there was the strangest, the



<pb n="79"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              79
most fantastic, kind of resemblance. He realised
now how much it had hurt him to have adopted such
a hostile attitude to Patricia.
In his household Mr. Sharpus was credited with
being tender-hearted. Nurse went further, and called
him "ridiculous soft" in his ways with the children.
Assuredly there was a very tender feeling holding
him in sway now.
He walked on briskly past the stabling attached to
Pitt Place. He was bent on an errand that was to
be a surprise and a delight to Meggy. One of the
farm helps had just told him of a small pony and
trap that was to be sold, and he was on his way to
view the animal and to purchase it if it was worth
purchasing. His destination was a small house lying
some distance past Pitt Place. It had been occupied
till quite recently by an old lady whose death had
brought about the sale of her pony and trap. The
house itself, so Sharpus understood, was let for the
shooting.
He walked briskly along, his thoughts still circling
about Patricia Prentice, and when he came at last
to the small house, he saw before him a party of
men with an evident keeper. Sharpus just glanced
at this party, and held back till it had made its way
down the path into the house; then he, too, went
down the path, and, skirting the garden, reached
the back premises.
There was no one to be seen, so after pausing a
moment, he advanced and rapped at a window which
he took to be the kitchen.
The door, which he had not perceived, was opened
immediately, and instead of a maidservant, a



<pb n="80"/>
8o            A YOUNG MAN
man appeared-one of the men of the shooting
party.
Mr. Sharpus rather curtly explained the nature
of his errand, and asked if the pony and trap could
be sent over to him in the morning if they were not
already sold.
" It is too dark to see anything now," he observed.
But the man in the doorway laughed.
"Is it, by Jove? Well, it's not too dark for me
to recognise a good old pal when he comes along.
Gad, Tony, it's good to see you again, old chap!
Where the deuce have you been hiding yourself all
these many months? Come in, old chap! Come
in, I say! What! Do you suppose I'm going to
let you run off again when I've just found that you
are in the land of the living?"



<pb n="81"/>
,:            FROM    THE COUNTRY.             81
CHAPTER                   VII.
ATRICA had almost reached the end of the yew-VIII.
PATRICIA had almost reached the end of the yew-
tree walk, when she came face to face with someone
hurrying along towards the big gates and the high
road. As she and this figure almost collided, she
exclaimed:
"Oh!"    And   then  quickly:  "Is that you,
Stanton ?" Then, still more quickly: "Oh, Sheila,
darling, I did not recognise you! Where are you
going? And aren't you naughty to be out so late
when it is so damp!"
Sheila shook herself free of her sister's loving
touch.
"Don't be silly, Patsy," she said sharply. "Why
will you persist in treating me as if I were an
invalid ?"
"I thought you felt seedy-you said you were not
fit to go to the rectory."
Patricia spoke a little crossly. Despite her love,
there were moments when Sheila's strange moods
tried her a good deal.
" Don't you know an excuse when you hear one?
I am never well enough for the rectory and that tire-
some old woman! I am only going to post my
letters. The walk will do me good."
6



<pb n="82"/>
82             A YOUNG MAN
"Shall I come with you? " immediately suggested
Patsy.
Her sister refused this so curtly that the girl
drew back.
"All right!" she said tersely, "don't let me keep
you. You're in heaps of time for the post, of course,
but I'm afraid it's going to rain, and rain hard, too."
As she turned, Sheila moved after her.
"Patsy!"
The other girl paused at once.
"Of course, you know quite well I don't mean I
don't want you. As a matter of fact, I thought I
should meet you, and I had to come out Jane Morant
arrived at four, and she and mother have sat talking
of all the old dead people, and have been so depress-
ing and awful I-I thought I should go mad They
don't know I'm out, Patsy."
"Why need they know?" asked Patsy, in her
coolest way. " Now that Jane has come we can have
some freedom, thank goodness. How is she dressed,
Sheila-the same old brown serge ? And how long is
she going to stay ? Isn't it funny how fond mother is
of funereal people!" Then Patsy went forward and
kissed her sister. "Ducksie," she said tenderly,
"don't get wet  Shall I get you my brolly? "
Sheila refused the proffered umbrella, and the girls
parted. Patricia made her way into the house,
through the kitchen. Mrs. Prentice kept a small
establishment, and was a most exacting mistress.
Like many of her kind, however, she was well served,
and her cook and housekeeper had been with her
for years-an old retainer, matched by the coachman
There was, beside this, only a maid to wait on the



<pb n="83"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              83
ladies and assist in the housework, and a small girl
from the village to do the rougher work. Patsy was
always so sorry for these small girls.
"After all, we've grown up with mother, and that
makes it a little easier to understand her and her
ways; and, after all, she is our mother," she had
observed once to Sheila, "and that goes for some-
thing, but it must be pretty dreadful to come here
from a happy home and be bound and ground into
slavery."
Sheila was lacking in that warm rush of sympathy
which flowed out so freely with her sister to all who
were forlorn or oppressed. Patsy had not much
pocket-money to distribute, but she managed to
spare occasional pennies as a panacea for red eyes
and a woebegone expression, and, in return, she was
simply adored by all whose lot brought them to
Pitt Place.
There was an air of pleasant relaxation in the
kitchen this evening, which Patsy felt and understood
at once.
Few guests were received at Pitt Place, and fewer
still made welcome, but the woman who had arrived
on one of her rare visits was a person apart in Mrs.
Prentice's estimation, and though no one except the
mistress of the house could see any charm in Miss
Morant, one and all were grateful to her for coming,
for when she arrived Mrs. Prentice had so much to
talk about with her guest, and so much to interest
her, that she forgot to scold and grumble and oppress.
Patsy warmed herself by the kitchen fire.
"It is so comfy in here! " she said. The comfort
of the fire was necessary to her. Cheerfully as she
6*



<pb n="84"/>
84             A YOUNG MAN
had accepted her sister's explanation, Patsy had not
been deceived by it, and not even the conviction,
which had been forced home during the past week
in a dozen different ways, that her supposition was
correct, and that Sheila was fighting a hard and
secret battle with some unknown enemy, had
familiarised her with the position sufficiently to
make her regard it calmly.
From a child she had taught herself to believe that
Sheila was one of the cleverest, as she was surely
the dearest creature on earth, and she comforted her-
self at stray times now by remembering that in
Sheila there was a fair proportion of their mother's
strong will, and even a touch of that hardness of
nature which always clashed so much with Patricia's
outlook on life. Hence she troubled less in one sense
about her sister now than she might have done. But
still, it hurt her terribly to know that there was this
powerful, invisible barrier between her sister and her-
self. It gave her a pang to realise that Sheila had
to resort to subterfuge, that she crept out of the
house like a thief in the darkness. She had been
so wonderfully proud of Sheila; even the knowledge
that her sister was unpopular because of her cold
aloofness had seemed right in Patsy's eyes, because
it had been part and parcel of that proud spirit which
she admired so much.
It made her tremble now just to imagine what all
the people round and about would think and say if
they were to know that Sheila Prentice-Sheila, so
unapproachable, so sheathed about in dignity-was
called forth from her home by some strange summons,
forced to do her own errands by stealth, possessed



<pb n="85"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              85
by a mystery which had, Patsy felt only too certainly,
nothing pleasant in it!
The old cook, who had been nodding over a news-
paper a week old, looked at the girl standing in front
of the fire and wondered what had come to Miss
Patsy, she had such a serious air.
"You'll scorch, if you are not careful, miss,"
she said, with that accent of reproof in her voice
which long association with her mistress had
engendered.
"Shall I?"  Patsy woke from her thoughts and
snatched her skirt about her. She sniffed it appre-
hensively. "Just in time! Well, thank goodness,
it's the dark weather coming, and bums and patches
won't be seen, and, anyhow, I'm warm through now,
so I'll toddle upstairs."
"Wait awhile, miss, if you please. Seeing as you're
going upstairs, perhaps you wouldn't be above taking
this cup of broth to Miss Sheila. Stanton tells me
she's got one of her bad heads, and is gone to bed
till dinner."
Patricia checked the words which rushed so natur-
ally to her lips, and said, instead:
"All right!"
When the broth was made hot, she waited till it
was poured into a cup, and she went out of the
kitchen carrying the steaming beverage with all the
care necessary.
" You are a good soul, Martha," she said, " and you
will have a nice, big halo by-and-by if you get your
deserts."
She spoke with an effort. In this little episode,
more, perhaps, than in any other, she was painfully



<pb n="86"/>
86             A YOUNG MAN
impressed with the ugliness of the role her sister was
playing just now.
She climbed the stairs to her own room very
slowly. To feel tired was a new sensation to
Patricia, but, for the moment, she felt unutterably
weary. She sat for a long time surveying the cup of
broth, and her thoughts winged themselves from one
unpleasant subject to another.
"Well! " she mused out aloud, after a time. " I've
often heard people say that nasty things come
altogether, but I never felt it so surely till now.
Worrying about Sheila was bad enough, but now there
is Mr. Sharpus. I don't suppose I ought to trouble
my head about him one way or another, but we don't
all do as we should do, and I am awfully upset. I
never could have believed he would have been so
disagreeable! He has always laughed at other times
when I talked nonsense. Did he really suppose I
was in earnest about the tea? " Her face flamed into
a hot colour, and she pressed her cold hands to her
cheeks as if to hide the blush, even from the shadows
of her room. Then she laughed a weak imitation of
her usual brisk, merry laugh. " And, after all, if he did
think so, he wasn't far wrong. I did want to go to
the farm.   I know  now  I have been wanting
this ever so badly. And, of course, I shall never
go now."
She stooped, and, unfastening her boots, she kicked
them from her little feet, viciously.
" I don't want to cry," she said to herself unsteadily,
"and I know I shall howl in two minutes if I am not
careful."
In truth she sat and let the tears roll slowly down



<pb n="87"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              87
her face for a few moments, and then she dried her
eyes resolutely.
"If Jane Morant sees that I have been crying,
she'll ask all sorts of tiresome questions, and that
will start mother, and then we shall be jolly! "
Resolutely conquering her desire to give way to
regret and unhappiness, Patsy hurried out of her walk-
ing clothes. For once she was exempted from attend-
ing the tea-table in the drawing-room. Mrs. Prentice
was entertaining Miss Morant in the small room
which she only used on such occasions.
"How I used to hate Jane when I was a little
thing! " Patricia said to herself with a fugitive smile;
"we are certainly idiots when we are young-we
never see beyond the end of our noses. Jane was,
of course, a boon and a blessing, if we'd only
recognised her as such, instead of which, to me, at
least, she was an awful bogie. I only hope,"-the
girl thought suddenly-"that she won't meet Sheila
as she comes home. I must try and manage that
they don't come across one another."
She paused to reflect, and then, finding no other
plan feasible, she went quickly downstairs, and
approached the room where her mother and Miss
Morant were sitting.
She overheard eager words as she opened the door.
"Oh, a deplorable affair, my dear! " Miss Morant
was saying, "and there was any amount of scandal.
No one knows where she is now, but he has taken
the children.  Poor souls!  One must at least be
sorry for the children. I hear there are three of
them, quite babies, too."
Once again that hot colour rushed uncomfortably



<pb n="88"/>
88             A YOUNG MAN
into Patricia's cheeks, and this time there was a
further uncomfortable feeling pressing on her
heart.
Without names-she had instantly divined who it
was that was under discussion. And swiftly, and
almost fiercely, she resented this discussion.
Silence reigned as the girl advanced.
"I thought you would be practising," her mother
said coldly.
It was one of her rules, rigidly adhered to generally,
that gossip was eschewed in her presence.
The coming of Patricia was, therefore, inopportune.
Miss Morant took the hint, and picked up her
knitting.
"And how is the music?" she inquired in the
sprightly way she usually adopted when addressing
girls. "You must sing, after dinner, Patricia."
"That depends on mamma," Patricia said; "she
doesn't care for my singing very much.'
"There are many things I do not care for which
I have to suffer," Mrs. Prentice remarked gloomily.
She was sharply annoyed that the conversation had
been interrupted; annoyed, too, because she was not
quite sure if Patricia had not heard what was being
said as she came in.
Miss Morant sighed sympathetically, signifying
that she knew what trials there were in her friend's
life.
"But, of course, my dear, you are now devoting
yourself to more useful duties. You are at an age
to be a great comfort to your dear mother."
"At what age does the art of comforting begin to
sprout, I wonder?" queried Patricia.



<pb n="89"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              89
She was rather bitter in her humour.
" Nasty old thing! " she said to herself; "now she
is going to turn mother against him altogether. I
remember when she was down here in the spring, she
was devoured with curiosity about Mr. Sharpus.
Evidently she has been making it her business to
know all there is to know, and if she can put a wrong
construction on anything, why, of course, she will be
only too glad to do it."
Miss Morant affected to laugh. She had project-
ing teeth, and wore her hair parted and plaited.
Once in the long, long ago, someone had told her
she had a classically-shaped head, and she was still
proud of this possession. In a way, Patricia respected
and even liked 'her mother's friend; she knew Miss
Morant to be a clever and a courageous woman-
who had faced endless and cruel difficulties with an
undaunted spirit. Further, there were traditions of
a love story in the days of Jane Morant's youth, a
story which had ended in sacrifice because marriage
would have meant desertion of a crippled and only
parent.
"There must be real good in her somewhere.
Look what she did for her father," Patsy had said
once to her sister. But Sheila saw no good in Miss
Morant, save only as a means of diverting Mrs.
Prentice now and then, and so slackening the
exigent rule of the household at Pitt Place.
"You are an odd child," Miss Morant said, as she
laughed now.
"I have another name for Patricia's oddity," said
Patricia's mother harshly.
But Patricia only smiled.



<pb n="90"/>
90             A YOUNG MAN
"I know they want me to go, but I won't go," she
said to herself.
She had forgotten the reason which had made her
seek this uncongenial society, she only thought of 
Anthony Sharpus, of his proud, self-elected isolation.
She remembered his love for the little children
clustered under the farmhouse roof, and she had a
nervous, a delicate desire to stand and close the door
on all gossip and idle comment about him and what
he did.
" If there is a story it belongs to him-it is nobody
else's business to drag that story out, and hand it
round for everyone to make a fuss about I hate
this sort of thing! And if I stay I shall stop mother
and Jane talking for a little while at least."
So she dived into a big work-basket, and brought
out a piece of work which she played at every night
after dinner. It had been intended for a sofa cushion,
but the design had gone astray. Sheila had poked
fun at this specimen of Patricia's needlework for
weeks past now.
"I think you ought to extend it, and turn it into
a kitchen hearthrug. Martha would adore it"
"Don't sneer," Patsy had laughed, "it will serve
some good purpose-you see if it doesn't"
And sure enough her prophecy had come true, for
as she sat putting stitches in wildly, she felt that she
was building up a barrier to protect the tenderest
feelings of the man whose friendship meant so
much-so very much to her.



<pb n="91"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              9I
CHAPTER IX.
ANTHONY SHARPUS was late in getting back to the
farm. He had stoutly refused to respond to his
friend's invitation, and make one of the party at
the dinner which, it was stated, would be served early
at that little house; but he was not so successful
in shaking off the man whom he had come across
so unexpectedly and inopportunely. Not that he
disliked Lawrence Goodborough. That would have
been impossible. In truth he had something closely
akin to affection for this young man. But for various
reasons Sharpus was decidedly not in the mood to
invite intercourse with any who had known him in-
timately before he had come to Winchbourne, and
Lawrence Goodborough was one of these. It was
impossible, however, to inspire Mr. Goodborough
with the idea that he was not wanted.
He was only on a visit for a couple of days to the
small shooting-party, which it seemed would break
up altogether then, and when he had extracted from
Mr. Sharpus the unwilling admission that his tent
was pitched domestically within a figurative stone's-
throw of their meeting-place, the young man very
promptly, and with all simplicity, invited himself as
a guest at the farm.



<pb n="92"/>
92            A YOUNG MAN
" My dear fellow, you would be bored in a couple
of hours!" Sharpus said, a trifle impatiently.
"Try me! " was the complacent reply. And then
he put a query: "Did you ever know me to be
bored in the first place, and, in the second, don't you
know I simply adore being in the country. I can
live on anything, turn my hand to anything, make
myself generally useful."
As Sharpus had flatly refused to be taken indoors
and introduced to his friend's host, Lawrence Good-
borough had insisted on walking homeward with
him, and, little as he was wanted, Sharpus could not
refuse this.
He had parried all the questions he possibly could,
but Lawrence had a way of calling for confidence,
and hence his reluctant disclosure of his where-
abouts.
"Couldn't make out where you'd got to," Mr.
Goodborough remarked, as he listened.  "What
brought you down here ? Do you know the country
well ? There's no shooting, even for nuts, but they
tell me they have some good runs now and then
with the Winchbourne Harriers."
"Fairly good," said Sharpus.
He made one or two vain attempts to get rid of
his companion, but the other man stuck like a burr,
and from definite ill-humour Anthony Sharpus drifted
into a philosophic endurance which was not un-
pleasant
"Mountains may be moved, but not Lawrence
Goodborough when his mind is made up," he said
to himself.
And so it ended in his permitting his friend to



<pb n="93"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             93
make arrangements to put himself up at the farm-
house for a few days.
"Only, see here, Lawrence," the prospective host
said. "Just keep this to yourself. I don't want any-
body else coming down on me. To be quite candid,
my dear fellow, I really don't want you."
Goodborough laughed-such a hearty, healthy
laugh.
"Oh, that's all right! I think I know you a bit
better than you know yourself, old chap!"
But he lapsed into silence after that, and he seemed
suddenly oppressed with a sense of awkwardness.
"Of course, Tony, if you've really any reason for
wishing me not to come. If-I mean-"
But he found it very difficult to say what he did
mean. Sharpus understood him, however.
"Oh!    I'm all alone, except for the children.
You've probably forgotten Meggy by this time."
"Forgotten  her! Rather   not! Who    could?
That decides me right away. The farm and the
children are too much for me."
And afterwards, when they had separated, Sharpus
realised, not without surprise, that he was on the
whole glad to think Lawrence Goodborough should
be with him a little while.
They had separated just before reaching Pitt Place.
Hunger, not politeness, had suggested to Mr. Good-
borough the necessity of retracing his steps.
On the road, some little distance past the big iron
gates of Pitt Place, Mr. Sharpus met Miss Prentice.
He removed his cap, but Sheila gave him no
greeting.
"People must be blind when they call this girl



<pb n="94"/>
94             A YOUNG MAN
a beauty and tell me her sister is not to be compared
to her!" the man said to himself irritably. He sat
late into the night writing. Many were the surmises
in the neighbourhood as to what Mr. Sharpus did
with himself. Not a few would have been glad to
fraternise with him, but he was strangely unsociable
and decidedly inhospitable. Then, except for an
occasional appearance in the hunting-field, he seemed
to have no amusements. He certainly was no farmer,
that was abundantly clear; though he leased the
farm lands he left everything to the care and dis-
cretion of the bailiff, who had been there when he
had arrived on the scene.
Possibly, if anyone had taken the trouble to follow ,
Mr. Sharpus's movements very closely, they would
have seen that only with one person did he attempt
to play the part of a farm holder, and that person
was the mistress of Pitt Place. When in a desultory
way the bailiff had mentioned that Mrs. Prentice
wished to deal with him as she had dealt with his
landlord for fodder for her horse and pony, Mr.
Sharpus had surprised the man by declaring his
intention of going into the matter personally.
He really had no good excuse for breaking through
his stringent rules when he himself sought to establish
a recognition, at least, between the inmates of Pitt
Place and himself, but he had assuredly found a vast
amount of interest in playing the part he had set
himself, at least until that memorable evening when
he had been awakened so sharply to the fact that
his intercourse with one member of the Pitt Place
household carried with it certain elements which did
not make entirely for peace of mind.



<pb n="95"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             95
He had tutored himself severely in the time which
had gone by since that night, but all this common-
sense reasoning fell from him when he was face to
face with Patricia Prentice. And this was a matter
which he could not but deplore, seeing that it must
lead to an unsatisfactory conclusion.
"It is not as if I were free to think of these sort
of things," he mused to himself restlessly now and
then. It was a curious mixture of feeling which
drove him to his literary work.
For months past he had been procrastinating,
urging himself now and then to attend to the engage-
ments which he had entered into a year or so
ago; but his heart had not been in his pen and
everything had been discarded till this night, and now
he worked as if inspired. And the next day the
fever still possessed him, and he was only roused to
the knowledge that an outer world existed when
little Meggy came and whispered tender words, and
wooed him to eat and drink something.
The advent of Lawrence Goodborough at the
farm was a great joy to the children. He seemed
specially constructed to carry three youngsters on
his shoulders at the same time. No wild animal ever
roared as he could roar; no professional conjurer
had more tricks at his finger-ends. As for story-
telling-well, Sharpus had to confess with Meggy
that it was all "won'erful-most won'erful!"
"You've mistaken your vocation, Lawrie," the host
remarked at the end of the first day, and the children
had been wooed to the bed-room, and even to sleep
itself by the most resourceful of entertainers. "You
ought to start an infants' school."



<pb n="96"/>
96            A YOUNG MAN
Lawrence Goodborough laughed his delightful
breezy laugh.
"'Pon my soul, a good idea!"
He threw himself back on the couch, and lay with
his head cushioned on his two hands, and his feet
at a much higher level
"Will you give me those three to start with,
Tony ?" he asked.
Though he spoke brightly, there was a curious
inflection in his voice, a note which the other man
understood.
He smiled faintly as he shook his head.
"No. You must look farther afield. Those three
little souls belong to me, and I can't share them with
anybody."
Mr. Goodborough remained silent a moment, and
then he laughed again.
"School!" he said. "They'd be jolly ignorant
little beggars if they waited to be taught by
me."
Then he sat bolt upright.
"I say, Tony," he said, "I forgot all about it till
now, but I've accepted an invitation to dinner for
you as well as myself."
Sharpus's delicate brows met in a frown.
"I never go anywhere," he said tersely.
And the other man answered just a little im-
patiently:
" Oh, but that's all rot, you know! You can't shut
yourself up here for everlasting."
The two men were silent a moment, and then
Sharpus asked:
"Where are you dining ?"



<pb n="97"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             97
"We, you mean," Goodborough amended. And
then he explained. "It's like this. Hargreaves and
I were walking through your village yesterday, and
we met Lady Amelia Heatherington. I hadn't seen
her since last spring, and I used to go to Middlesex
House to play bridge with the duchess. She was
awfully civil, and asked me at once and Hargreaves
too, to go to Winchbourne Court to dinner.  Of
course, he said he was off, and I said I was goin' to
put up here, and naturally she asked you to dine
too, and I said you would. See?"
The frown lingered on Anthony Sharpus's face.
He looked so annoyed that the other man felt un-
comfortable.
"Of course, you can send an excuse," he said
hurriedly, "but really I didn't think twice. Lady
Amelia said she was having a parochial kind of
dinner-the parson, and the doctor, and your
neighbours at that funny, old, ramshackle house, Pitt
something or other-and so I just said 'all right,'
and that settled it"
"Oh, I can send an excuse, .of course," said
Sharpus.
And then they talked of other things, and the
subject dropped. But when the next day, as they
sat at luncheon, there came a formal little letter from
Winchbourne Court requesting the honour of Mr.
Sharpus's company to dinner several nights hence,
to his guest's surprise Mr. Sharpus announced his
intention of accepting the invitation.
"As it is going to be a parochial gathering I may
as well go," he remarked.
To which Mr. Goodborough answered:
7



<pb n="98"/>
98            A YOUNG MAN
"That's right, sonny. And, having made up your
mind, stick to it See!"
Meggy looked gravely across the table at the
young man, her eyes full of reproof.
"You mustn't speak rudely to Tony," she said.
"He hasn't got no mind. He's a gentleman."



<pb n="99"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.              99
CHAPTER X.
MRS. BARTINGALE'S spirits rose when she heard of
the proposed entertainments at Winchbourne Court.
Truth to tell, the good soul had suffered a bitter dis-
appointment in the very certain failure of Lady
Amelia Heatherington, not merely as an important
social factor but as a great personage.
Even Mrs. Bartingale was constrained to admit
that Sir Francis's wife did look appallingly shabby
and most unattractive in her every-day outdoor gear.
She knew that the trunks had reached the Court,
and she had read magnificent accounts of the trous-
seau provided by the Duchess of Middlesex for her
daughter, but no one glancing casually at Lady
Amelia as she went through the village could possibly
have mistaken her for a bride, and a distinguished
one. Then the aloofness of Lady Amelia had
threatened to be disastrous. Mrs. Bartingale had
promised and vowed so many delightful things in
the name of the mistress of Winchbourne Court that
the period of silence which followed on the arrival
of the Heatheringtons at the old-fashioned house
had tried the rector's wife immensely. She, there-
7*



<pb n="100"/>
0oo           A YOUNG MAN 
fore, gave a big sigh of relief and delight when notes
were written and invitation cards went forth from
Winchbourne Court.
Not only were there several dinners, but Lady
Amelia invited the neighbourhood to a big gather-  9
ing on Boxing Day.
This had been Sir Francis's idea.
"Suppose we try and have a jolly Christmas,
Amy," he said to her on his return from that little
shooting excursion. "Sophie and her husband have
practically invited themselves down here for a week
or ten days at Christmas, and we must have some
sport I propose a Christmas-tree. That would
wake up the neighbourhood."
Lady Amelia had looked at him doubtfully for a
moment. She felt so far, so very far away from this
suggested gaiety, but the protest she would have
uttered remained unspoken. Those days of his      /
absence had been so dreary, so full of desolation.
Before he had gone she had been a prey to the
most bitter and even harsh feelings. Emotions
hitherto unknown to her had surged tumultuously in
her heart, but when she was alone she had wandered
about the house realising in a sort of anguished way
that he was gone (and more particularly that he had
seemed so eager, so glad to go), and she had said
to herself wildly that all-all would be easy to bear
if only he would always remain with her, if only she
could feel that he was near.
She had made acquaintance with a new self in
those desolate days. It was reserved for this time
of separation to show her how tremendous was the
power of this love which had her now so completely



<pb n="101"/>
FROM THE COUNTRY.               IOI
in sway-what unimagined delights and what agonies
it could signify to her.
She could neither eat nor sleep, and grew haggard
eyed and white-faced. Sir Francis exclaimed when
he saw her.
She explained her appearance with a lie.
"I caught cold, and I have been ill. But I am
all right now!"
"Ill! Then why the dickens didn't they let me
know?   Did Mitchinson come? No!    Why not?
He's rough I know, but I believe he's a splendid
all-round man. Look here, Amy, I am going to
send for him now!"
" No, no! " She put out her thin hand and caught
him by the arm  "No, Frank; please, dear, don't!
I never need a doctor, and I am really better."
"You don't look it"
The young man was greatly upset She had a
very fragile look. He felt again that uncomfortable
sensation as if he had been guilty of some definite
wrong to her.
"And I've had such a good time, too!" he said
to himself reproachfully.  It was true.  Burdened
as his heart was now he had nevertheless managed
to forget his trouble in the zest and excitement of
his sport
Lady Amelia preferred not to talk about herself.
On the contrary, she discussed their plans and even
expressed pleasure (which she was far from feeling)
that her sister should wish to visit them.
"Do what you want at Christmas, Frank. What-
ever you like, I shall like," she said, in a low voice.
As she sat by the fire and watched him move about



<pb n="102"/>
102           A YOUNG MAN
the room, her heart thrilled and leaped with a joy
that was tender and savage, full of exultation.
He was hers-hers, and he had come back to her.
Oh! he must never leave her again. His presence
was like the life-giving warmth of a glorious sun-
shine.
To keep him close to her, to have that blessed
sense of possession, there was nothing she would
not do. Nothing-nothing!
His very real solicitude about her was so exquisite,
it brought tears to her eyes and a soft touch to her
faded cheeks. If she could have studied her own
feelings she would have shut herself apart with him
from all the world, but his lightest desire was her
eager duty.
Once she said half humbly:
"I feel so out of all these sort of things, Frank
I was always stupid at entertaining. I remember
so well how furious mother used to be with me.
Hermione and Sophie could do anything, but I -"
she finished with a little, pathetic gesture.
" I'd rather have you fifty thousand times over than
Hermione and Sophie," Sir Francis said promptly,
and he went on to remark that he hoped devoutly
that Lady Sophie would tone down her com-
plexion just a little when she came to stay with
them.
"If she puts on so much paint down here she'll
frighten Mrs. Bartingale into a fit," he said. '
He went out of the room a little later and looked
back through the doorway to make a remark:
"Look here, Amy," he said, a trifle hurriedly, "if
you want anyone to give you a helping hand with



<pb n="103"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             103
these dinners, and especially with the tree, why not
enlist the Prentice girls? They'd love to help you,
I'm sure; and it would be a real charity on your part
to give them a chance of getting away from that
dead-and-alive hole. The very look of the place
is enough to 'make one shiver."
Lady Amelia made no reply, indeed he did not
wait for any. As he went out to the stables a kind
of excitement ran in his veins, coupled with deter-
mination. Back in the same neighbourhood with
Sheila.she dominated him again.
"Does she think I am going to eat her?" he
asked himself a little resentfully. "Why the devil
does she keep away from me? I verily believe she
won't go out nowadays because she's afraid of meet-
ing me. Patsy runs about as usual, but Sheila one
never sees."
A moment or two later he left the stables and
went for a sharp, brisk walk across the fields, his
thoughts occupied solely with that one, that vital
subject
"What does she do with herself?" he queried.
"What will she do with herself? It's horrible to
think she's just there, and that I'm here, and that
we both want one another, and can never, never
come together now.   Sheila, my girl, you did a
d-d bad thing for both of us when you played at
pretending you did not care what I did or where
I went"
He walked round about the outskirts of the Pitt
Place grounds. Once upon a time the Prentice
family had owned nearly a thousand acres of arable
land, but little by little it had dwindled, being bought



<pb n="104"/>
104            A YOUNG     MAN
up by sundry farmers in the neighbourhood and
leased out for pasture or cultivation.
For the house itself Mrs. Prentice had had, to Sir
Francis's knowledge, more than one good offer. It
was unentailed, and she could have sold it had she
wished, but it was well known she would rather be
in her grave than part with the place where she
had lived all her life.
The house lay so low that only the roof and upper
floor could be seen from where Sir Francis stood,
but this was enough for him. In her chattering way
Patricia had once sketched for him the routine of
life and the arrangements inside Pitt Place. So he
knew quite well where to look for the windows of
Sheila's room, and it was not the first time that he
had stood as he now stood looking across the
distance which divided them with his heart in his
eyes.
At dinner that same evening Lady Amelia told
him she had taken his advice and had written and
asked Miss Prentice and her sister to come to her
assistance in her proposed Christmas festivities.
"One gets so selfish," she said, in a humble way.
"If it is in my power to do a little for these girls
or for any one else round and about here I will do
it But I would rather you advised me in this, Frank.
I find Mrs. Bartingale rather oppressive."
Sir Frank laughed. A sense of delight radiated 
him for the moment. He could think of nothing
but that Sheila would come to his house. Sheila
would be near him. He could look at her; perhaps,
at times, touch her hands-those slim, delicate hands
-which he could crush so easily. The thought of



<pb n="105"/>
-J. J,..qsIJ .  J.  A.t ^ , V  1.   J A. J.%J
her manifold beauties intoxicated him. He drew his
breath quickly.
His wife looked at him; there was a burning pain
at her heart. Not that her jealousy was individual-
ised, only that in such a moment she saw how young
he was. She felt how withered her own youth
had become. She had dressed herself with more
care, and had picked out a white tea-gown from
among the numerous splendid garments of her wed-
ding outfit
When it was on she had almost torn it off again,
it so cruelly emphasised her sallow skin; it suggested
so much freshness, but there had not been time to
change, and when she got downstairs she had been
amply rewarded. Sir Francis admired her openly.
"Always wear white, Amy," he said, "it is most
becoming to you."
And, indeed, she had a charm about her this night
which had been lacking altogether in her since their
marriage. Her husband was delightfully tender and
appreciative.
Just because his heart leaped and his pulses thrilled
as he whispered to himself the madness of his love,
he set himself to be doubly attentive to the woman he
had married. It was not wholly casuistry which
prompted him to this. He turned naturally to take
up the care of one who, though so much his senior,
was like a child in his life.  In truth, he was en-
circled once again by that spontaneous expression of
sympathy which had carried him to so tragical a
point when he had known of Lady Amelia's persecu-
tion at the hands of her mother and Mr. Iscariot.
Her gentle attitude disarmed him, too. There had



<pb n="106"/>
o16           A YOUNG MAN
been a very definite sense of possible friction between
them before he had gone away. This was entirely 
at an end now. Heatherington was so very human in 
all his qualities that he may be forgiven if down at
the bottom of his kindly feelings towards his wife 
there lurked the pleasant assurance that by absenting
himself he had brought her to a reasonable frame
of mind. Even the best and kindest of men love
their mastership !
I
i



<pb n="107"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             107
CHAPTER XI.
IT would have been fitting in with Anthony
Sharpus's experience of life-at least, of life as it
had passed with him of late, if disappointment should
have awaited him when, having sacrificed every
objection-and he had many-to making a social
appearance in Winchbourne, he had followed
Lawrence Goodborough into Lady Amelia's charming
low-roofed drawing-room. But for once his hope was
gratified, for the very first person he caught sight of
as he passed in through the doorway was Patricia
Prentice.
She was talking to the rector; her expression was
happy; she had the old alert, frank, childish look
about her, the look he loved so much. And she was
so pretty.
Both she and Sheila wore pink frocks of some
soft material, made by their own nimble fingers, and
fashioned as simply as could be.
To avert displeasure, Patsy had abstained from
coiling her abundant hair high on her head, and here
again she was a match with her sister, for Sheila
always wore her beautiful hair parted and pinned
in one large classical knob at the base of her small



<pb n="108"/>
io8           A YOUNG MAN 
head, and this night Patricia had followed suit 
Somehow this severe method made her younger than
before.
She gave Sharpus a smile, and her small white 
gloved hand, but still there lingered something in 
her expression which hurt him, which was a kind of 
reproach to him. The fact was, that Patsy was a
little shy. In his evening clothes there was such
fulfilment of that distinction which she had vaguely <
recognised always about this man; he had such an
air of being apart from the rest of the people that
she felt almost afraid of him.
As the rector moved away, and they were alone,
he compelled her to look up and meet his eyes,
and as she saw that they were full of light, and
that he was smiling, she took heart of grace.
"How nice to see you here," she said gaily.
"Is that just an ordinary pretty speech, or merely
the truth ?" he asked, as he released her hand with
reluctance.
She laughed.
"I always tell the truth, Mr. Sharpus."
"Do you? "
He questioned her face far more eagerly than he
was conscious of.
"Few women do," was his remark, given a trifle
grimly after that little pause, but he hastened to
amend this by saying, " Of course, it is very surprising
to you to see me here?"
"Not exactly surprising-nice," she corrected.
"Nice is a half and half kind of word," Sharpus
said. He leaned against the piano and kept his eyes
fixed tenderly, admiringly upon her delightful face.



<pb n="109"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             o09
"I cannot really think of any other at this moment,"
said Patsy, just a little unsteadily.
"Well, one thing is very sure; I only came here
to-night because I hoped for the chance of seeing
you." His tone was very positive
Patricia looked at him an instant, and then looked
away.
"That is the sort of thing I suppose you think is
expected of you," she observed, half wistfully.
He moved his hand an infinitesimal degree and
just touched hers that was lying on the piano for an
instant.
" Like yourself, I always speak the truth."
Patricia blushed tremendously. Even her delicate
throat grew crimson for a second. The touch of his
hand electrified her. A sense of amazing joy took
possession of her. She stood silent-not confused,
simply dazed-and Sharpus felt her quiver.
" You must protect me," he said hurriedly. "Here
comes the rector's wife with curiosity bristling on
her like the quills of the porcupine The last time
we met in the village she eyed me doubtfully, as if
she thought I had designs on her fowlhouse It
must be a fearful shock to her to meet me here."
He was right Mrs. Bartingale had literally gasped
when she had looked about her and had recognised
in the slim, elegant, yet manly young man talking to
Patricia Prentice the mysterious occupant of the
Treasury Farmhouse. As Mrs. Prentice was absent
through indisposition, and she was deputed to
chaperone the Prentice girls, she considered it her
bounden duty to interrupt what looked like a very
regrettably intimate conversation.



<pb n="110"/>
I o            A YOUNG MAN
She really thought it rather foolish-only that a 
duke's daughter could never of course do foolish 
things-of Lady Amelia to have made her invitations
so general, "Because of course," she said to herself,
"it cannot fail to put wrong ideas into people's
heads."
It was only in keeping with her judgment of Mr.
Sharpus that he should adopt such a calm air-an
air of positive indifference to his present whereabouts,
as if dining with people of quality was an everyday
occurrence with him.
She had not the least idea that the man was daring
to poke fun at her till she caught a certain expression
on Patricia's face. Mrs. Bartingale was a good
Christian, and had her temper well in hand as a
general rule, but she let the curb go now.
"I think," she said stiffly to Patricia, "Lady Amelia
is looking at you as if she wished to speak to you.
Will you come with me ?"
Just for an instant the girl hesitated rebelliously,
but then, with a shrug of her shoulders, she obeyed.
"And after all," she said to herself restlessly, "I
dare say her interference is a good thing for me, for
this can only lead to stupidness."
In fact, she was vexed with herself for experiencing
such unrestrained delight at the mere sight of this man.
It was uphill work trying to talk to Lady Amelia,
who certainly had expressed no sign of desiring a
conversation with her, and yet Patricia eagerly
pursued the task She felt safe beside her hostess
and gradually grew easy in mind and manner again.
No one could complain that Lady Amelia had not
taken trouble about her dress this night  She bore



<pb n="111"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             III
witness to the fact that she must have given her
maid good employment. Her hair was elaborately
arranged, and she wore a small tiara. Her gown
of white satin had a long train, and the bodice was
laced tightly about her spare figure. She wore a
few splendid jewels.
It was natural to her to don this kind of garment,
though she hated it, and she wore it with that dis-
tinction which always marked her. And yet Patricia
felt so sorry for her. Handsome as the gown was, it
was so ugly in its conventional stiffness. There was
nothing ethereal about Lady Amelia's thinness. Her
neck lacked the merest significance of prettiness, her
arms were like sticks.  Undeniably aristocratic as
she was, her reserve gave a suggestion of gaucherie
to her manner.
And while they stood together, Sheila stood just
beyond them. Sheila, so lovely, so dainty in her
pink gown, so young, so fair!
She was listening to Lawrence Goodborough as
he talked away with light-hearted ease. Sir Francis
was standing close by, supposed to be engaged in
conversation with the rector; but watching him with
an apprehension of which she was wholly unconscious,
Patricia remarked how little heed he gave to his
companion, and how intently his eyes were fixed
on Sheila As far as she knew, her sister and their
host had not spoken beyond the exchange of greeting
as they arrived.
At another time Patricia would have rejoiced in
her sister's beauty, but to-night it almost hurt her to
realise how like a queen Sheila rose superior to
all in the room, and how painfully her freshness,



<pb n="112"/>
II2            A YOUNG MAN
and her loveliness contrasted with the woman whom
Francis Heatherington had married.
"It is too bad of Frank!" the girl said to herself
hotly. "He must know he is making Sheila un-
comfortable when he stands and stares at her like
that. She won't show this, of course, but it is bound
to upset her."
Dinner, which was announced at that moment,
came as a relief to Patricia. She was taken in by 
the curate-Mrs. Bartingale's pet detestation-and  i
Sheila and Mr. Goodborough- went in together. It
was an interminable meal. Sir Francis was not in
good spirits. This was at once remarked, and at   ;
Lady Amelia's end of the table a frigid air prevailed. 
Lawrence Goodborough seemed to be the one
person who was really enjoying himself. His laugh
would ring out like a bell every now and then; his
efforts to entertain his table companion were crowned
with success. Despite that curious sense of uneasi-
ness, Patricia found joy in watching her sister.
When Sheila laughed and chatted so merrily she
looked just as she had been wont to look in those
old days before Patricia had gone abroad. There
could not be any real trouble shadowing her-so
Patsy said to herself eagerly-when she could look
and be so happy.
The curate, who had more than a passing admira-
tion for the younger Miss Prentice, droned away on
all the usual tiresome subjects, and Patsy shot him
answers at random. When she was not looking at
Sheila she was trying to catch a glimpse of Sharpus,
who was seated on the same side of the table as
herself, and who was apparently very deeply interested



<pb n="113"/>
VKUUM   il -H   COUNIKY.        113
in all Mrs. Mitchinson had to say. He might at
least have looked once in her direction!
When the ladies rose to go back to the drawing-
room, Sharpus sought and found the eyes he desired,
and Patsy went out of the room smiling unconsciously.
She slipped her arm through her sister's.
"Darling," she whispered. "You look such an
angel!"
Sheila suffered the endearment passively.
"I'm glad I look all right, for in reality I've got
an awful headache. I think I shall sit in the con-
servatory for a few moments.  I don't want any
coffee. Why don't you start the music, Patsy?
Everybody will bless you, I am sure. What a death's
head that woman is!"
The conservatory lay beyond the drawing-room,
and Sheila after gracefully lingering a moment with
the other women, sauntered on and passed out of
the light into the shadows of the palms and ferns.
Patricia watched her sister go wistfully, then she
went up to Lady Amelia and sat beside her.
"It's so awfully good of you to let us help you
with the Christmas tree," she said.
Lady Amelia was, as usual, monosyllabic.
It was treadmill work making conversation, but
Patricia stuck to her post Something pitiful seemed
to tug at her heart She had a sudden yearning to
make this woman wake to the knowledge that
affection and sympathy were being offered to her.
All the time she was chatting away, Patricia was
watching the door, and when the men came in at
last, she found herself watching Sir Francis eagerly.
She saw him pause and look about him quickly, then
8



<pb n="114"/>
II4           A YOUNG MAN
as the other men filtered across the room he dis-
appeared.
"He has gone to find Sheila!" Patricia said to
herself, and she shivered with apprehension and in-
dignation, too.
She put all the blame on the man.
"It is too horrible!" she mused, as she talked on
fluently, and a patch of hot colour burned on either
cheek. "I don't understand Frank. If what I think
is true, and he has been miserable enough to fall in
love with Sheila now, he might at least consider her,  '
I think. It looks so marked of him to leave every-  I
body in this way."
While these thoughts were burning her, she was
chatting away almost feverishly to the woman beside
her.
Lady Amelia gave Patricia really very little en-
couragement to talk so much. She sat by the fire-
side, her primness and lack of modernity emphasised
by the gown she wore. Patsy tried, and tried in
vain, to find some touch of sympathy, some sugges-
tion of charm in this middle-aged wife of Francis
Heatherington.
The girl deplored the white satin and the jewels.
They sat well on Lady Amelia, it was true in one
sense, but they seemed such a mockery in another.
Whereas a woman of a different class would have
looked vulgar, perhaps, in this garb, Amelia Heather-
ington looked what she was emphatically-a well-
born and well-bred woman, but the lustre of the
satin, the decolletage, threw up too clearly the fact
that youth and she had not touched hands this many
a year.



<pb n="115"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             II5
And Patricia Prentice's warm, loving heart was
full of pity for her.
Mrs. Bartingale, hovering near by, was shocked by
Patsy's usurpation of their hostess. She made several
ineffectual attempts to stem the flow of words, and,
at last, when Patricia was describing a Christmas
party she had been to in Germany, in a very sharp
tone, she broke in with a reproof:
"There, my dear, that will do. No doubt this is
all very interesting to you, but it cannot possibly
interest Lady Amelia, you know."
Patsy stopped abruptly, and caught her breath in
a sighing way.
It was really an expression of relief, for at that
moment Sheila had made her reappearance. Her
sister noted quickly how pale Sheila was, and how
dark-stained her eyes were. Lady Amelia caught
that sound in Patricia's voice. She could be gracious
in her cold way, at times, and she was gracious
now.
She rose as Patricia turned to move away.
"Won't you sing to us? You sing so charm-
ingly," she said.
Patsy agreed at once, and made her way across
the room again towards the piano. Immediately
Anthony Sharpus detached himself from the man
with whom he had been talking, and went to her
aid. She was opening the piano.
"Are you going to play?"
Patricia shook her head.
"No. Sing."
" You play, though, don't you? "
She laughed nervously.
8*



<pb n="116"/>
In6           A YOUNG MAN
"Yes, a little."
Then she asked him to go to Emily Bartingale,
and beg her to come and play the accompani-
ments.
He made as though to go and then came back.
"What are you going to sing?"
He turned over her music as he spoke, and then
seated himself at the piano.
"I have a fancy to play your accompaniments,"
he said coolly.
Patsy opened her eyes, and at her expression he
smiled.
"Yes; I know you are very particular. Well, if
I do badly, I give you leave to turn me off."
He began moving his fingers softly over the keys,
improvising a kind of prelude, and then he har-
monised into the key of the song open before him,
and looked round, pausing for the singer to begin.
Patricia had a wistful expression in her eyes, and
perhaps, for the first time in her young career, she
hesitated to begin. Then she opened her lips, and
she sang, as she could sing, most exquisitely.
The doctor's wife crossed over and sat close to
them.
When Patsy's first song came to an end, Mrs.
Mitchinson said in her sharp way:
"Make her go on-and on! I could listen to her
all night and all day, too, and your music just matches
her voice"
So, despite Mrs. Bartingale's austere and con-
demnatory look (who was this man that he should
take away her Emily's chance of distinguishing her-
self? And how like Patricia Prentice to encourage



<pb n="117"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             II7
a perfect stranger to take so much liberty! Really,
it was the last time she would chaperone these girls!)
Patsy sang again and again. And she sang only
for one person. Her audience dwindled down to
one-she even overlooked Mrs. Mitchinson. Her
singing, which was always a happiness to her, had
become permeated this night with a perfectly un-
reasonable sense of joy.
"How deliciously you play!" she said, when at
last they paused.
He was looking at her.
"And to think I never dreamed you could sing!
Where was my discernment-where my imagina-
tion?"
Colouring violently with pleasure, Patsy said, in
her pretty, impertinent fashion:
"Perhaps you haven't got any."
Sharpus smiled.
"A good many people are of that opinion, I
believe," he said drily; then abruptly: "When are
you coming to eat hot cakes and drink tea, and make
friends with the children ?"
Patsy shrugged her shoulders.
" I'm not half sure I want to come now," she said.
He looked at her keenly, and then said:
"Oh, very well!"
And then, terribly afraid of losing once again a
chance she so earnestly desired, Patsy touched him
on the arm as he was turning away.
"You see I can't come alone," she remarked a
little feebly, and very quickly she added: "Why
not invite Mrs. Mitchinson? She's really an awfully
good-hearted woman, and simply adores children."



<pb n="118"/>
118           A YOUNG MAN
"But do you want to come ?" he queried, looking
directly into her eyes with a slight frown on his brow.
Patsy laughed.
"Now I know that you have no discernment what-
ever your imagination may be!"
She left him making plans with the doctor's wife,
and went to join Sheila, who was lying back in her
chair, listening to Lawrence Goodborough's chatter
with a faint smile on her lips.
It was very evident that Mr. Goodborough was in
danger of losing his heart to this lovely, oval-faced,
delicate-skinned young woman with the mystical
dark eyes and the lips that smiled so seldom, and
were at once so bitter and so sad in their
expression.
Sir Francis, who was at the other end of the room,
watched them narrowly. He seemed to be talking
rather loudly, and was in a decidedly boisterous
humour.
"Darling, don't you think we ought to go?"
Patricia asked hurriedly.
"I have been ready to go for the last hour, but
you were so busy amusing yourself that you forgot
all about me," Sheila remarked in her cold, quiet
way.
Mr. Goodborough had begun to pay Patricia
elaborate compliments.
"Never heard anything so rippin'! Once, when
I shut my eyes, I thought I was in heaven."
Sheila laughed slightly at this.
"To shut your eyes in this assembly was a wise
precaution." She got up gracefully as she spoke.
"If we don't make haste the Ludleighs will have



<pb n="119"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            119
taken our fly, and then we shall have either to walk
home or to wait here for hours."
But even as she spoke, Sir Francis, seeing that
she was about to go, broke away from the group of
men with whom he had been talking, and came up
to her.
"I've ordered the motor to take you and Patsy
home," he said, and his tone was masterful
"You are very good," Sheila Prentice said. She
spoke coldly, and moved on towards the fireplace,
where Lady Amelia stood saying "good-night" to
her parting guests.
Lady Amelia just touched the hand of each of
the Miss Prentice's in turn. Those two fresh, youth-
ful figures in their simple, delicate gowns of pink
seemed to wither her into silence.
Mrs. Mitchinson pounced on Patricia as they were
going and whispered:
"Tuesday at four-we'll meet there-don't you
think that will be best? "
Mr. Goodborough followed closely in Sheila
Prentice's train, and both he and Mr. Sharpus were
standing in the hall wearing their great coats when
the two girls came out with their wraps on.
Sir Francis, however, quickly repudiated any
attempt on the part of these other men to pay any
attention to the guests whom he was speeding away
in so luxurious a fashion.
His manner was scarcely sympathetic Indeed, a
few minutes later, when the two young men left the
house and started out on a brisk walk homeward,
Goodborough remarked openly on their host's
manner.



<pb n="120"/>
120           A YOUNG MAN 
" Never knew Heatherington to be like that before.
By Jove, he nearly snapped my head off when I
said something to him just now! Of course, I
suppose he's huffed with things generally, but, after
all, if he has been and gone and done an asinine
thing, he has nobody but himself to blame. He
wasn't bound to marry his grandmother."
"I am not at all sure," Sharpus remarked after
a little pause, "that I have much sympathy for
Heatherington. If either of these two call for sym-
pathy, it seems to me it is the wife."
The other man uttered an explanation indicative
of incredulity.
"My dear chap," he said, "Heatherington has
always been known to be one of the best goin'-
absolutely one of the best!"
"Perhaps, then, he has deteriorated a little lately,"
observed Mr. Sharpus drily. "At any rate, I'll tell
you what, Lawrie, supposing he has done what you
have just called an asinine thing in marrying this
woman, there are no two ways, in my opinion, as to
how he ought to treat the situation. There was
something inexpressibly pitiful to me written in Lady
Amelia's face to-night. If I were Heatherington, I
should make it my life's work to prevent such a look
coming on the face of any woman I married, no
matter how old she might be or how ugly."
"Oh-you!"
An inflection of utter hopelessness rang out in
those two words ejaculated by Lawrence Good-
borough. There was, indeed, a whole volume of
meaning in them, and the two men lapsed into silence
and trudged the remainder of the distance without



<pb n="121"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             I21
exchanging a word. At the farm, as he was looking
up, Sharpus said:
"Freezing hard; no hunting to-morrow, Lawrie."
"I don't care! I'm as happy as a hunter down
here, whatever comes."
Meanwhile, the motor-car had sped swiftly to Pitt
Place.
"This is nice!" Patsy had exclaimed as they flew
through the night. " Oh, Sheila, if only some good-
hearted and really intelligent fairy would bestow some
of the luxuries of life upon us! Do you know I
believe I should be quite happy if I had all I wanted ? "
"At times!" said Sheila impatiently. "You talk
fearful rubbish, Patsy. One gets rather sick of it,
you know."
"If I don't talk rubbish I shall weep," Patsy
answered in a voice that quavered suspiciously.
Then  she added: "I am     so unhappy-about
you!"
She spoke on the spur of the moment, and regretted
her words most sharply after they had been
spoken.
Sheila made no immediate response. They had
come to a standstill, and the chauffeur had got down
to open the gates. As he remounted to his seat
and they began to move again, Sheila said:
"When you are a little older, you will learn that
you do no earthly good to yourself by worrying over
other people's affairs."
Patricia had kept back her tears with a big effort
Something in her sister's voice hurt her.
"Other people are other people. You are you,"
she answered in a low tone.



<pb n="122"/>
122            A YOUNG MAN 
Sheila received this little speech fraught with the 
tenderest suggestion in silence. Just before they
stopped in the courtyard, she spoke again. 
"You sang very well to-night. What a difference 
a good accompanist makes! Emily simply murders
those songs. Did you know that this mysterious Mr.
Sharpus was a musician?"
"How should I have known?" queried Patsy, just
a little tartly.
Sheila shrugged her shoulders, and drew her skirts
together as she alighted from the car.
"Oh, well, I thought you and he had struck up
a great friendship."
It was Patricia who paused to thank the chauffeur
-she was always gracious in these little ways, and
invariably treated servants with courtesy.  Miss
Prentice had walked in through the kitchen door,
where the old cook sat nodding by the fireless grate
waiting for the young ladies to come home, and
Patsy followed her sister.
The younger girl, moved as she was by so much
that was weighty and even saddening, resolved not
to do anything which might further alienate her
sister, and, consequently, she avoided any reply to
Sheila's last speech, but chatted on brightly.
"It was nice to feel so safe when I was singing.
Emily generally does a kind of steeplechase with
that last song, and I have to leap hedges and hold
on to bars to keep up with her."
"From what Mr. Goodborough said, I fancy you
were exceptionally honoured. He was not very
explicit, but I gathered that music, and especially a
woman's singing, was usually a hurtful matter to Mr.



<pb n="123"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             123
Sharpus. Perhaps he played his wife's accompani-
ments."
Sheila went out of the kitchen as she spoke, but
Patsy remained behind to help the old woman bar
the doors and turn the rusty keys in the equally
rusty locks. She was conscious of something more
than the soreness and sadness which of late had
crept into her heart whenever she thought of Sheila.
There had been a curiously bitter flavour in all that
Sheila had just been saying. Patricia did not at-
tribute this for an instant to any definite feeling
against Anthony Sharpus; it was merely the open
expression of those sentiments which seemed to hem
her sister about in these days. As she said "good-
night" to the cook and climbed the stairs cautiously
in the darkness to her own room, Patsy bit her lip
nervously.
"I never want to sing again!" she said to herself
wearily.
And when she reached her own room she sat down
and cried quite bitterly. It was very, very foolish,
as she told herself later on, when the tears were dried,
and she was lying on her pillows, but tears were in
her heart still.
"Perhaps he played his wife's accompaniments!"
Sheila's careless and yet half-sneering words rang
again and again in Patsy's ears. They had meant
so little to her sister; they meant so much to the
girl lying with wide-open and wet eyes in the dark-
ness of the night. Patsy realised gradually what this
great significance was, and then she was glad of the
darkness, for in the darkness the colour which crim-
soned her face could not be seen, neither that nor



<pb n="229"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            229
He roused himself in a little while to ask some
practical questions.
" You cannot stay with your mother, you say, but
what if your aunt should be away ?"
Patsy sighed.
" I have no definite plans. Dr. Mitchinson told me
where I should find his wife, but she is with people
I know nothing about. I don't think I could go to
her. Perhaps Jane Morant can advise me." Then
she pulled herself up. "But I shall be all right I
am hoping Aunt Judith will be able to take me in.
If she can't I shall go to an hotel."
He said "Impossible!" to this very sharply, and
looked so cross that Patsy felt a little nervous of him,
and, just by way of showing that she was not nervous,
she became irritable.
"Why impossible ? Hotels are intended for people
to go to when they have nowhere else to go, aren't
they?"
"You are not people," said Sharpus, "you are a
child. An hotel is out of the question."
"Oh, well, I shall go somewhere!" Patsy retorted.
And after that they sat in silence as they jolted
along. Then Patsy spoke.
"You know I don't want to be rude," she said
apologetically, "but really, I feel anyhow. The
world seems to have turned upside down since yester-
day." Then she said: "Wasn't it odd that I should
meet you? Really, life is awfully funny sometimes I "
She shivered a little and stamped her feet on the
bottom of the cab.
"Every time Christmas has come," she said, "I
have wanted something to happen-some excitement



<pb n="241"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            24I
her fingers more closely still on her hot, weary eyes,
she remembered what this something was.
It was very strange that her aunt should have been
so positive that Sheila had not been to stay with her.
Most surely in that letter of which she had spoken
-one of the prim dull letters her mother had sent
every week-the fact had been definitely stated that
Sheila had gone to London to spend some days with
her aunt
Mrs. Prentice never made mistakes.
"Aunt Judy must have forgotten," said Patsy to
herself wearily, restlessly.
She did not want to worry about this, but the
matter refused to be dismissed. Over and over again
she pondered it, finding no satisfactory conclusion.
There came a time, however, when the girl compre-
hended how it was that this small matter, which
might have passed from her mind, especially at such
a time, and been forgotten, had remained in her
thoughts so persistently, fretting her so strangely.
But gradually all questioning and conscious
thought became fainter. Gradually the throbbing in
her head became less acute. Gradually the silence
and the warmth and the fatigue worked their way.
She must have been asleep for nearly two hours when
she opened her eyes with a start, and saw her aunt
looking at her anxiously.
"Rested?" asked Mrs. Langridge. "Come, that
is good! I have a delightful little dinner coming up
for you, and here is a letter just brought to the door
by your young man from the country. I was passing
through the hall, and I made him come in for a
moment He is charming, and so sympathetic I
I6



<pb n="242"/>
242            A YOUNG MAN
told him he must come and see you to-morrow, and
he promised he would come."
Patricia roused herself with some difficulty. She
felt stiff and a little sick, and her head ached
violently.
Seeing that the girl was really unfit for conversa-
tion or food, Mrs. Langridge insisted on bed as a
treatment, and when she was undressed, and lying
with her eyes closed, Patsy had to confess that her
aunt was a wise physician.
It was so delightful to feel the touch of the soft
pillows beneath her head, and the sense of warmth
from the bedclothes; but warmer, more delightful
than any other feeling, was the knowledge that she
had a letter from him-paper which he had touched
crushed in her hand, and pressed closely, closely to
her poor, tired young heart!



<pb n="243"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            243
CHAPTER XXIV.
ON leaving Patricia at her aunt's house, Anthony
Sharpus told the old cabman to take him to Clifford's
Inn. He shivered a little as he sat back in the cab.
The day had promised to be depressing and
miserable enough in the commencement, but that
spell of companionship so unexpected, so unspeak-
ably sweet left a void which was little less than
terrible to the man. So strong was that feeling of
yearning which possessed him that at one moment
he felt he could not remain in the cab alone-he
could not possibly live through the rest of the day
with no society but his own. However, the mood
passed, and he sat forward and looked at the familiar
streets which had yet such an unfamiliar expression,
empty as they were of traffic or of crowds on the
pavement
He was going back to some rooms which he had
had now for a number of years. Snow was falling
fast, and so undisturbed was the roadway that the
soft flakes were piling softly on one another. As
they bowled down the Strand and passed the Law
Courts, it might have been a deserted city through
which they were travelling.
I6*



<pb n="244"/>
244            A YOUNG MAN
Sharpus loved this part of London. It was asso-
ciated in his mind with perhaps the happiest time
of his life-the time when he first began to write,
working silently, almost stealthily, in those few hours
which were at his disposal. He had hated the
routine of the commercial house, but when the daily
work was over, then the city had become to him a kind
of enchanted world.
Then he had been 'wont to steal out into the
darkness of the winter's night, or into the twilight of
the summer one, finding poetry in the many quaint
old comers, inspiration from the world of shadows
which at that quiet hour represented that other busy
clamorous world; and the memories of those hours
of solitude and delightful impressions bound him
still in affection to his old chambers.
When he had satisfied, and more than satisfied, the
cabman, he turned in under the old archway, and
passed through the snow-covered courtyard. It was,
at least, homely and cheerful when he unlocked the
door of his room. The housekeeper had kept the
fire going, and in the letter-box he found several
letters.
He stood a long time warming his hands without
taking off his heavy coat, and, while he stood there,
there came the sound of someone running up the
stairs, and then a sharp knock at his door, the knock
evidently of a telegraph-boy. He gave the lad a
shilling and tore open the telegram with a frown.
The message had been sent from Dover.
"Weather terrible," it ran. "Impossible to cross.
Cannot stay here. Returning by first train. Shall
go back to hotel."



<pb n="245"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            245
It was signed "Carina."
Sharpus let the telegram flutter on to the table,
then slipped out of his coat, and, pulling a chair up
to the fire, sat down to warm himself and to think
The telegram was no surprise. The announcement
that the sender of it was probably even then on her
way back was something for which he was fully pre-
pared.
"I told her," he said to himself. "I warned her,
but she would go!" he sighed. "She will never
change!"
He sat and stared into the hot coals, and in a
dreamy, introspective way, he passed out of the realm
of thought on a subject which occupied him in a vital
way almost every hour of his life, and remembered
only Patricia.
She was with him so dosely, so tangibly; it was
as though he could reach out his hand and touch
her. The tearless anguish which had gripped her
so mercilessly had changed her, just as some spell
of physical suffering might have written its des-
tructive influence on her face. And yet, notwith-
standing this, she had seemed to him younger,
tenderer, more childlike even than he had ever seen
her before. If he could have wrapped his arms
about her, and held her to his heart, he would have
been less desolate now; he would have felt that he
had something of her actual and precious self left
with him. He was quite sure that she was grateful
to him-just as he knew that the sight of him had
brought her for a time, at least, a sense of happiness.
But he wanted more than that He wanted to be
the one to take the sting of this dark sorrow out of



<pb n="246"/>
246           A YOUNG MAN
her heart; he wanted to give back to her that
radiance of spirit, that sheer delight in life itself,
which had illumined her and made her a creature
apart from all other creatures in his eyes. He won-
dered what sort of woman this aunt was ? Materially,
all would be well with her-there had been every
sign of luxury about the house; but it was not bodily
warmth or luxury that she needed.
"I almost wish I had persuaded her to go to Mrs.
Mitchinson," he said to himself irritably. " Of course,
I suppose it is the right thing that she should be
with this aunt; but there is a grip about Mrs.
Mitchinson, a touch of the mother which the child
wants."
He pushed back his chair, after a while, and reach-
ing down a favourite pipe, filled and lit it, and then
he turned to his letters. One he kissed before he
opened it He knew that crabbed, uncertain, yet
elaborate writing so well, and he read Meggy's letter
first.
"Derrest darling der," the child wrote. "I hop
your are Well. I am quite well, but I am not, nott
hapy. Baby is very Well and goode, but Edmund
has been sick. I am sending you 2 violets"-the
spelling was not conventional-"which nurse found
in a wod.-Your own little
" MEGGY."
"Anno domini 90o5. R. S. V. P."
Sharpus held the letter to his lips again and
smiled a little faintly; he was thinking that by
this time all the packages he had been so careful
to send off the day before would have reached their



<pb n="247"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            247
destination. He knew the child too well to expect
that she would be content with toys and pretty
things instead of himself; but he also knew that she
would have at least a short spell of pleasure in open-
ing all the little packages and distributing the gifts
as they were directed.
His other letters he read leisurely. One was from
Laurence Goodborough, a chatty note expressing
the writer's real regret that his visit at the farm had
been brought to a close so abruptly, and entreating
Sharpus to send a few words when he had time. Mr.
Goodborough wrote very frankly about Sheila Prentice.
"I am afraid I am really bowled over this time,
dear old chap. She is the loveliest thing I've ever
set eyes on; only she's so terribly unapproachable.
I can't make out whether she hates to have me speak
to her, or whether she doesn't quite hate me. The
Bryne-Joneses are here, and Lady Sophie-who can
see through a brick wall better than most people-
seems to have stumbled on my state of affairs, and
is awfully kind in giving me a sort of hope. It
doesn't seem like Sheila to confide in Lady Sophie;
but, then, I don't know very much about girls, so
perhaps it's all right I wonder what you are going
to do with yourself to-morrow? I do hope you
won't spend a lonely Christmas; and if you send
those children away, as you told me you thought
you would, I am afraid you can't help being des-
perately lonely. I shall think of you to-morrow and
drink your health."
There were a few words scribbled at the end of
the letter: "I heard from my mother this morning.
She was full of questions about you. She was so



<pb n="248"/>
248            A YOUNG MAN
glad to hear that I had run up against you once
again, and entreats me to get you to run down and
stay a week or two with her this spring. She says,
'Tell him to bring the children.' I thought that
would fetch you."
Sharpus bent forward and knocked some ashes
from his pipe.
"Laurie is a real good sort," he said to himself.
"I hope for every reason that he is not going to
make himself a fool about this girl It might go
hardly with him."
He had long ago arrived at one satisfactory con-
clusion, and that was that the girl whom he had seen
running through the darkness that by-gone night
had certainly not been Patricia. It was not until
some time later that he had by chance discovered
that Sheila Prentice had not been present with her
mother and sister at that first dinner-party given by
Sir Francis and his wife at the Court
Judging her by her familiar look-that extra-
ordinary proud bearing which characterised her so
distinctly-it was rather hard to associate Sheila
with the girl he had seen that night. Yet that it
was she Sharpus soon convinced himself. She must
have borrowed her sister's coat and hat, and very
probably, if she had been remarked by others, she
had been mistaken for Patricia.
Her peculiarly cold treatment of himself did not
trouble Sharpus at all, only inasmuch as it militated
against his chance of friendship with her sister.
He had never admired Sheila. He knew she was
beautiful, yet her beauty said nothing to him;
whereas if Patricia only smiled he thrilled.



<pb n="249"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.            249
It was, of course, a question of temperament. He
made a determined effort to forget Patsy, and after
awhile sat down and began working. But his
thoughts were electrically charged with nerves. It
was impossible not to ally himself intimately with
her in these hours of suspense.
The attitude of the mother appealed to him
pathetically, too. He had often pondered over Mrs.
Prentice and her strange nature. This day she had
upon her an endowment of dignity which touched
him. As he could not rest, he scribbled a few words
to Patsy and went out again. It warmed his heart
just to think he would be near the place where she
was, if only for a moment; and, above all, it was a
joy to know that his yearning sympathy would reach
her through the medium of his letter.
He had to walk the greater part of the distance.
It was certainly a strange Christmas Day. In every
house he passed there seemed to be festivity. The
dusk of the mid-winter began to gather very early,
and lights were lit. Through some windows he
could see distinctly.
When he reached Mrs. Langridge's door he felt
as though he stood on the threshold of his joy, and
his brief glimpse of and the few words exchanged
with Patricia's aunt sent him away comforted.
He took an immediate liking to Mrs. Langridge.
He was very glad he had gone on this errand; now
he would be more satisfied about the girl.
Yet he was tired in heart and body when he finally
reached the large, fashionable hotel for which he
was bound.
He ascertained that the lady he sought had just



<pb n="250"/>
250           A YOUNG MAN
arrived, and he was at once conducted to her sitting-
room. A newly-lit fire gave a cheerless look to the
scene, and crouched up on a sofa, simply buried in
furs and rugs, was a pretty woman, who gave a cry
of joy at sight of him.
"Oh, Tony! You angel! So you did get my
wire! I was in ten thousand agonies lest it should
not have found you. You rushed away so quickly
this morning after you had put us in the carriage
that I had no time to ask you what you were going
to do to-day. Oh, Tony, what a day! What a
demoniacal country this is in winter! Baxter and
I nearly died of cold coming up from Dover.
Conceive a train which stopped everywhere! Wasn't
it awful, Baxter?"
A maid who was moving about the room arranging
things-a plain, sensible-looking, middle-aged woman
--said: "Yes, ma'am-awful! " in a perfunctory way.
She took Sharpus's coat as she spoke, and then, at
her mistress's command, stretched a newspaper in
front of the fire to draw it into a blaze. Anthony
Sharpus bent to hold one side of the paper, and as
he did so he remarked: ,
"It would have been infinitely better if you had
gone to an hotel in Dover for the night You gain
nothing by coming back here, especially travelling
in such discomfort"
The woman on the sofa gave a little cry.
"Stay in Dover! All to-day and all to-night!
My dear Tony, I should have gone stark, staring
mad! Oh, the sight of that grey, stormy sea! I
shiver now when I remember it And the sound
of it-so mournful, so angry! And there were



<pb n="251"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.            25I
people who actually crossed. Can you imagine
anything so insane?"
Sharpus straightened himself, and Baxter folded up
the newspaper. The fire was crackling and roaring
up the chimney; in a little while it would give out
a tremendous heat
"Oh," said the man, as he stood with his back
to the blaze, "then the boat did run? I imagined
from your telegram the service had been suspended! "
"It ought to have been suspended. It was not
a day for a dog to have crossed in. Thank Heaven
I had some sense! And thank Heaven we are back
in some comfort! Baxter, ring the bell. We must
have something to eat I am starved. Tony, you
have dined, of course?"
He said "No," quite simply, and it struck him
as odd that he had forgotten that he needed
food.
"No? You funny boy!"
She began to shed her furs, and Baxter, after
ringing the bell, picked up everything in her
methodical fashion. As she disappeared into the
bed-room the other woman said gaily:
"But so much the better. Now we shall dine
together and be jolly, eh?"
She stretched out her hands, and Sharpus pulled
her up from the sofa   She stood revealed an
enchantingly pretty woman-not too tall, and per-
haps a trifle too plump. In her dark-skinned, oval-
shaped face and her lustrous eyes one saw a marked
resemblance to the man standing beside her. But
her features were less cleanly cut, and in her face
there was none of the power which was written



<pb n="252"/>
252           A YOUNG MAN
so eloquently on his. As a matter of fact, they were
brother and sister.
"You don't look a bit pleased to see me," she
said, and her expression changed. The gaiety, even
the colour, went out of her face; it had a pathetic
look  "I know, I know. I am always a trouble
Poor Tony! Poor dear, dear old Tony! If you
only knew what happiness it is to be with you, dear,
you would never send me away-never, never!"
He kissed her; but he smiled, gravely and even
sadly. Then he sent her into the bed-room.
"Go and put on something comfortable, and I
will order dinner. We must dine up here, Carina.
I hate the restaurant!"
"Where you like, dearest Whatever you wish
I will do. I always do what you want, don't I ? "
The words were spoken half gaily, and she vanished
as she said them.
Sharpus' gave his orders when the waiter came,
and then, when he was alone, he stood and stared
into the fire, and something of a grim nature stole
into his expression.
He was thinking of Patricia; but now she was
no longer near-indeed, it was as though she had
gone out of his reach for ever.



<pb n="253"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.            253
CHAPTER XXV.
WHEN the dinner was served, Sharpus did his best
to enjoy it; but though he had been hours without
touching food he realised that he had no appetite. His
companion, on the contrary, enjoyed her dinner
thoroughly; she ate with the pleasure of a child,
chattering away gaily the while.
When the table had been cleared and they were
alone again, she made her brother pull the couch
right in front of the fire, and she bunched herself on
it once more, and, lighting a cigarette, threw back
her head with a sigh of contentment.
"This is nice! " she said.
The man stood by the fire and looked down on
her with very conscious pleasure, for she was good
to look at-but also with a marked degree of sad-
ness in his expression.
"You are an extraordinary woman !" he said
abruptly, after a while. "You change so little; in
that pink thing you are wearing you look almost as
young as Meggy."
She sat forward with a jerk, and her whole ex-
pression changed-just for a moment the softness
and even the charm itself of her face disappeared.



<pb n="254"/>
254           A YOUNG MAN
"Oh, Tony!" she said, in a strained voice. "I
want Meggy!   I want my babies!   Why did you
remind me of them?   Are you sure-quite, quite
sure-that they are all right?"
"Don't worry," he answered tersely. "They are
all right. If anything was wrong with them I
shouldn't be here."
She had dropped her cigarette, and he stooped
and picked it up and gave it back to her.
She held it, however, abstractedly in her fingers.
"I don't forget them, of course," she said; "still,
I am trying not to think of them too much. It isn't
easy, and sometimes it all seems so wrong-what I
am doing, I mean. Baxter will tell you I can't sleep
when I start thinking about the children. Often
and often I imagine I hear Meggy calling me, or I
fancy that Eddie or baby are crying. It's really
awful, it wears me-and there is so much in my life
to wear me. When they were down in the country
with you I felt almost happy about them; now it's
all the uncertainty, the doubt, over again.  I can't
think why you sent them away and by themselves,
too," she finished fretfully.
"We went into this so fully yesterday," Anthony
Sharpus answered, "there is really nothing new to
say." Then, with just a touch of impatience and
irritation in his voice, he added: "I think you might
trust me. I have never failed you yet, and where
these little creatures are concerned I am never likely
to fail you."
"You have been an angel-you are an angel,
Tonyl You have always been so good to me, and
really, sometimes I feel as if I have let you do too



<pb n="255"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            255
much. Of course you love the children, still, they
must be a bother and an anxiety, and a nuisance
also if the truth was known!"
She lifted the cigarette to her lips and smoked in
silence, a troubled silence, for a few moments; then
her expression tranquillised.
"But it will only be for a little while longer," she
said. "Look how splendidly I am doing. I always
knew I should make money if I was only given the
chance. Of course "-she shrugged her shoulders-
"there are drawbacks. I hate this constant travel-
ling; it spoils all the pleasure. There is only one
good point about it, and that is, that when I am
perpetually on the move I haven't time to sit down
and fret about things."
As he remained silent, she turned with a flounce
on the pillows.
"Let us talk of something else," she said.
"You will go to Paris to-morrow ?" he asked.
She shrugged her shoulders, with one of those
little movements which so indubitably marked the
Southern strain in her.
"Who knows? Certainly not if the weather is
like it has been to-day."
"But your engagement-you are to sing the day
after?"
Again she shrugged her shoulders.
"Well, then I shall not sing; I shall be ill, or I
won't be ill-I will pay damages. You see," she
laughed, with just a little suggestion of arrogance,
"I can do these things if I like; I am not a nobody."
"I think it's a mistake to play with your pro-
fession," Sharpus said quietly. "Into the old vexed



<pb n="256"/>
256           A YOUNG MAN
question as to whether you did rightly or wrongly
in adopting the career of a public singer I am not
going to enter; if we were to argue from now to
Doomsday we should only be where we were at the
beginning. I may, however, be permitted to counsel
you. You have advanced very rapidly, Carina, but
if you want to keep your place you must be loyal
to your public, and to the people who engage
you."
She laughed.
"Now you are well started," she said. "How you
do love to preach l"
"It's certainly a stupid proceeding," Sharpus said.
He moved forward, and bent as if to kiss her, but
she held him by the coat.
"You're not going-no, you mustn't go, Tonyl I
have a heap of things to say to you, and we meet
so seldom Of course you vex me; but when you
are not with me I want you so much."
She slipped round and made room for him on the
sofa.
"Sit there," she said. "In half an hour you shall
go if you want to go, and then Baxter shall put me
to bed. The cold has got into my bones. Oh, it
was awful at Dover to-day. I have never experienced
anything like it. Last winter, when I was in
America, the cold was intense at times; but it was
such a different cold-sharp and clear, with a bright
sky nearly all the time. Could anything be more
depressing than a day like this? Did you send all
my presents to the children ?" she queried abruptly.
He nodded his head.
"At least," he said, "I kept back the diamond



<pb n="257"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            257
ring. Meggy shall have that when she is a little
older."
She flicked his cheek with her hand.
"Tiresome old thing," she said. "Why, the ring
was the one thing I wanted Meggy to have. All
the American children have their own jewellery.
Sometimes it seems to me as if a little of those
Puritanical ways I hate so much had crept into you,
Tony."
She flung the end of her cigarette into the fire,
and slipping from the couch, she sat on the hearth-
rug and clasped her hands about her knees.
"Tell me again all about her going to the farm-
horrid, hateful, hateful old creature! How obstinate
she is! Why won't she leave you in peace? But
you are her master now," she laughed, a hard, a cruel
little laugh. "I wish I had been there! I should
have loved to hear you send her away! I hope you
were rude to her! Old beast!"
Sharpus did not answer at once, then he said
slowly:
"I don't think I should trouble about her, if it
were not for the fact that in some way or other she
terrorises Meggy. At first I thought this would
pass, but it does not pass. Whenever the child is
happiest there seems to come to her a sudden dread
that she will be taken back to her grandmother's
house, or that her grandmother herself is coming.
It was really remarkable how some instinct possessed
the child the night on which your husband's mother
did come to the farm. She was ill for days after-
wards."
"I never dare let myself think what may have
17



<pb n="258"/>
258           A YOUNG MAN
happened in those weeks just before Charles died,
when I was so miserable and I rushed over to you
in Italy. Baby was safe, because she was with me,
and she never hated Edmund, but she always, al-
ways hated Meggy. I suppose because Meggy is
so like me, and because Charles always made such a
fuss about her."
She unlocked her hands, and changed her position.
The fire was hot, and reaching for a newspaper, she
held it as a screen before her face.
"Whenever you are very, very angry with me,
Tony, and feel that you would like to shake me,
you must just try and imagine all that I went
through in those years I had to live with Charles's
mother. It was so horrible that I could never have
a little place of my own, and I had to suffer that
woman's hateful intrusion into the most precious
and intimate things of my life. You are fond of
telling me that Charles cared for me; and I shall
always answer back that if he had really loved me
he would never, never, never have forced me to
live in his mother's house. Oh, I know! "-she
put up her hand as if the man sitting on the sofa
were about to make a protest. "I know I made
my own bed, and I had to lie on it I married
Charles with my eyes open, and therefore I ought
to have been prepared for everything that came.
That is what the world would say. But the world
isn't always right; it's dreadfully wrong nearly
always, and it was very wrong in my case."
"My dear," said Anthony Sharpus gently, "why
go over all this?  It serves no good purpose; it
only frets you and unsettles you. It is all over and



<pb n="259"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            259
done with. Of course, you made a great mistake;
but, after all, you are not the only person who has
made mistakes."
"To listen to that miserable old viper one would
believe that I was the only person in the world who
was capable of doing wrong. Oh, Tony! "-there
was real emotion in the speaker's voice-" if only
we had been able to live our lives without her, every-
thing would have been so different! Charles saw it,
poor fellow, when it was too late; if he had not
realised it so thoroughly, he never would have left
that will giving the children into our joint care. I for-
gave him nearly everything when he did that. If
he had made me sole guardian it would have been
less bitter to her, because she would have felt she
could have got her way with me; but you-you are
a different matter altogether! And yet, even now
when everything is settled I am afraid of her. Tony
never let her get the better of you, she must hate
you so awfully. Though you are so strong, so clever,
she is so strong and so wicked, I--"
He got up, and stooping, he drew her to her feet
and put his arm about her.
"Now we have talked enough, and you must go to
bed. I will come round as early as I can in the
morning, Carina. I have something I must do before
coming here, but I expect I shall be with you about
ten; then, if you feel like it, I'll take you down to
Dover myself."
He kissed her gently and he smoothed her hair.
"Good-night!" he said. "And sleep well"
She laughed, but there were tears in her eyes.
"Happy dreams, as the children say." Then she
I7*



<pb n="260"/>
260            A YOUNG MAN
insisted on helping him on with his coat, and made
him turn up the collar. "Tony, will you stay here
to-night?" she asked him suddenly. "I am sure
there are any amount of rooms in the hoteL"
But he shook his head.
"I have work to do, and a great number of letters
to write. I will be here to-morrow at ten."
He called Baxter from the bed-room.
"Although it is early," he said, "I think Mrs.
Dalesmere will do well to go to bed."
He left the hotel in a thoughtful, a depressed
mood. There was nothing new in the present situa-
tion, and yet he seemed to feel the need of bracing
himself up to meet new and antagonistic forces.
To legislate for his sister Catherine's happiness
was a task discarded long ago. She had always
been a source of anxiety to him. He felt more con-
vincingly to-night what he had tried to urge on her
when she had resolved on her independent career
-that, even if success should crown her every effort,
she would never find the life productive of real
satisfaction.
And yet she had been born for gladness. She was
a creature emphatically destined in the world's
opinion for flowers and sunshine, and the very easy
decorative side of life.
There were not many years between them, but he
felt old enough to be Carina's father. Indeed, he had
played the father and the protector since he had
been a mere lad, not only to his sister but to their
mother.
Anthony Sharpus had adored his mother, but he
had never been blinded to the follies-the amazing



<pb n="261"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             26I
discrepancies as it were-in her nature. When, in
later years, he went to Italy and made his life among
his mother's people, he understood her so much
better. He recognised there that what had made her
so difficult, at times so impossible to follow,
had been the powerful racial influence-that pas-
sionate emotional temperament which waged war
unceasingly against the restraint, the reticence and
the seeming lack of all sentiment which are the
leading characteristics in the average English man or
woman.
Anthony himself had many a time been denounced
by his mother for his coldness and his undemonstra-
tive nature. Yet she grew to rely on him, to find
the greatest comfort in his steady purpose. And
before she died it was granted to her to look into his
heart and realise how beautiful was the love shrined
there.
The care of his sister had passed to him naturally.
There were others to direct and control till he had
come of age, but then, when he had been made
master of the small income his father had left him,
Anthony had insisted upon charging himself with all
the duties and responsibilities of manhood.
And Catherine had provided him with plenty to do.
She had been a tempestuously lovely girl; her
education had been one long series of stormy
episodes. She was idle, she was insolent; she flirted,
she flouted. Trouble followed her wherever she
went Anthony tried governesses, and then fell back
on schools. Even a convent could not crib or confine
Carina's irrepressible and most innocent wickedness.
She had, however, one passion-singing, and her



<pb n="262"/>
262           A YOUNG MAN
voice, inherited from her mother, was her dearest
possession.
Marriage for Carina had not even dawned in
Anthony's plans for her future, when she wrote to him
one day and announced that she was a wife.
She had gone to stay with some school-friends in
Hampshire, and there Charles Dalesmere had met her.
Nominally a rich and an independent man, in reality
Dalesmere had been a pensioner on his mother's
good-will, and his marriage was a matter which was
something which his mother had intended to arrange
in due time with all proper ceremony.
She ruled his life as she ruled his house. What
money he had was barely enough to keep him in
the many luxuries to which he was accustomed, and
when he took a wife he had only his own dependence
to share with her.
Anthony knew his sister well enough to be assured
that it had not been Dalesmere's social position or his
prospective wealth which had influenced her when
she had consented to marry him. The moment had
been propitious for folly. In all probability she had
never stopped to reason or reflect, and the man had
worshipped her! This had been her first encounter
with a "grande passion." There was a delightful
novelty about the situation. Even the runaway
wedding had been delightful-so amusing.
But very early Anthony had been summoned to
smooth out the pathway. He had been most un-
favourably impressed by Dalesmere.
"In God's name, why did you not choose a man ?"
he had flashed out at Carina.
He had regretted the words almost at once, but



<pb n="263"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            263
it had not needed this to force home on Catherine
Dalesmere the terrible mistake she had made.
Her brother could do very little. He made over to
her half his own income to ensure her a little inde-
pendence, and he endeavoured to persuade her
husband to start his married life apart from his
mother's intimate influence.
He failed, however, to make any impression on
Dalesmere, though he elicited unwilling approval
from the elder Mrs. Dalesmere by his straightforward
attitude and his denunciation of what had been done.
To brace the other man up to the point of doing
something for himself, of supporting his wife, was
an altogether futile effort. Here the mother worked
against him assiduously. The marriage was a bitter
blow to her, but she had accepted it and had forgiven
her son on the sole condition, however, that things
remained as they had been when he had been a
bachelor-a condition to which the man seemed
content and eager to accede.
Sharpus went through his daily toil at that big
commercial house in which his father had been
interested, and from which he drew his modest
income, with a weight on his heart after Carina had
left him. He had been glad to work on, for his
sister made constant inroads on his money. And
then it was he conceived the idea of converting his
literary work to a material issue, of supplementing his
income, if possible.
There was much that would have been delightful
to him in his life in those days, if only his heart
could have been at rest about Carina. But there
was never a week without some miserable letter,



<pb n="264"/>
264            A YOUNG MAN
some outbreak of passionate rebellion. Even her
children seemed to give her no happiness.
"They belong to her. I am nothing and nobody,
and Charles lets her do all she wants," she had said
once. Always there was the fretting of her impulsive
passionate nature against the bars which confined
her.
" You were right to reproach me," she wrote once
to her brother. "Charles is not a man, he is a worm!
He is the weakest creature God ever permitted to
live, and she makes him weaker!"
Yet, with all this, there had been much in Carina's
life that would have been impossible for her to have
had if she had left her husband and returned to her
brother, as she had so constantly threatened to do.
The Dalesmere establishment in the country was a
splendid one; there were innumerable servants.
When she wished to drive Mrs. Charles Dalesmere
had a choice of carriages. Her babies had a retinue
of their own. She dressed magnificently, and her
beauty had become almost famous as time had
passed. These were matters of real importance to
her, and with a shrewdness that is not unusual in the
Southern nature she had undoubtedly recognised
their value and their necessity.
Otherwise the end would have come long before it
did come.



<pb n="265"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            265
CHAPTER XXVI.
AND yet the wonder was that the end had not come
much sooner. With two natures so strong in their
respective peculiarities and so absolutely hostile to
one another, the marvel was that Charles Dales-
mere's wife and mother had suffered a joint existence
for as many months as they had spent years to-
gether.
There had, of course, been frequent rebellious out-
breaks on Carina's part, many occasions on which
Sharpus had been called upon to intervene, and his
wisdom and his influence had prevailed when every-
thing else had been powerless to move Carina. It is
just possible that if he had been on the spot he would
have been able to prevent the final mistake which
had such a tragic ending.
The working out of her destiny had been hastened
by and through her passionate devotion to music-
her voice the vehicle which had carried her to a ruth-
less separation from domestic ties, to independence,
and eventually to fame. An overwhelming need of
excitement, of some natural outlet had driven Carina
to find solace in her singing, and from the rank of



<pb n="266"/>
266            A YOUNG MAN
an accomplished amateur, she had progressed to that
of a finished artist In this she had always had her
husband on her side; he was proud of her, he de-
lighted in hearing her sing. With the obstinacy of
a very weak nature, he had thwarted his mother when
she would have prevented this, and so, with sublime
irony, had brought on himself the inevitable catas-
trophe.
Anthony had been wandering in Italy when the
scandal of his sister's flight from husband and children
came to his ears. He had his sister's assurance, and
he believed it-for, with her many faults, Carina had
never deceived him, her honesty being almost a fault
-that the man who had been instrumental in opening
the bars of her cage was as little to her as the earth
beneath her feet If it had been otherwise it was
hardly likely that the woman would have sought her
brother, yet the first person to whom she had rushed
had been Anthony. And in her flight she had been
accompanied by her nurse and her baby.
His belief in her, however, his confident knowledge
that she was really innocent, counted for very little,
unfortunately. It appeared later that she had paved
the way for false conclusions by a very reckless flirta-
tion with the man who was supposed to be the com-
panion of her flight The verdict of the world was
dead against her, as it was bound to be when the
story of her deserted little children and her broken-
hearted and dying husband became public property.
It is to be feared that she had given but little
thought to the man she had married when she had
gone out of his house. She had always been impa-
tiently indifferent to Dalesmere's physical delicacy. It



<pb n="267"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             267
had been easy for her to class his constant ailments as
purely imaginative ones. The news therefore that in
attempting to follow her he had broken down pitifully
and lay helpless-a victim to hemorrhage of the lungs
with only the beginning of his miserable journey
fulfilled-came upon Catherine Dalesmere with a
shock.
Anthony had no need to urge her to go to her
husband for the little while he had to live, for with
that spasmodic and impulsive sympathy which
characterised her, she at once determined that this
was her duty. He took her himself to the place
where the sick man was, and was a witness to a
pathetic reconciliation.
His meeting with Charles Dalesmere's mother was
something quite different. Sharpus always regarded
this as one of the most terrible experiences of his
life. He had naturally to listen to the most intoler-
able abuse of his sister, and he could make but a poor
defence for Carina  Later, when Dalesmere was
dead, Anthony had to hear himself arraigned as a
schemer, and a dishonest one. Her son's will pro-
voked the woman to something like frenzy. She left
no effort untried to attempt to upset that will, to
divest Anthony of that authority which the dead
man had bequeathed to him.
She would not give up the two elder children
until she was absolutely obliged to do so. Even then
she made Anthony's life a burden to him. Her venom
against Carina was so pronounced that there were
times at first when Sharpus had feared for his sister's
bodily safety. As it was, her anger was potent
enough. Though it was not in her power to dis-



<pb n="268"/>
268           A YOUNG MAN
possess her son's wife or children of that which would
have been her son's when she was dead-Edmund
the little boy would reign in her place-she could
and did cease all supplies during her lifetime, and
consequently the burden of the little family fell
entirely on Anthony Sharpus. He accepted the
responsibility cheerfully, although his path was beset
with difficulty.
To please or satisfy Carina was simply impossible.
At her suggestion he had sought a home in the
country, but when he had found this and everything
was settled, she had refused to go there  She wanted
London.   She said she could not breathe in the
country-that she would go mad boxed up for months
at a time with no one to see, no chance of hearing
music, no excitement of any kind.
Matters would have gone very hard with the young
man if fortune had not befriended him. He had
never anticipated the coming of money, yet money
came to him through the death of a kinsman. And
after that everything was a little easier. He aban-
doned the country scheme, and began to look about
for a house in town, where Carina could have the
kind of life she craved for. He did all he could to
interest her. He studied her in every way, and she
failed him, of course.
Almost before he could realise what had happened
she had adopted the career of a professional singer.
Just as she had run away from her husband's care
and the claims of duty, so she cut herself adrift from
her brother's protection. Naturally she was primed
with plausible explanations. She pleaded hatred of
dependence, a desire to work out things for herself



<pb n="269"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             269
and her children, a strong desire to rid Anthony of
a burden, but these arguments had their own signi-
ficance for her brother.
However, he saw the futility of obstructing her in
her new career. To press remembrance or the claims
of duty upon her was merely waste of time. If her
children could not hold her naturally, no amount of
pleading on their behalf would do this. He had to
turn himself into a dual parent, and the love which
he lavished on the three little children came back to
him a hundredfold.
There were times, of course, when the sense of
responsibility, when the perpetual necessity of recog-
nising that responsibility weighted him not a little.
Times, too, especially of late, when the unconven-
tionality of the situation demonstrated to him that
it had its drawbacks; but if he felt weary and doubt-
ful, and a little depressed, he only had to shut his
eyes and let the vision of Meggy's sweet, wistful face
come before him once again, and he would grow con-
tented.
At least, that was how matters had been-every-
thing very simple and conclusive, even up to the
time when he had left the farm; but now it was
changed He wondered to himself just a little, as he
plodded through the slush and the cold rain back to
his chambers, what Carina would have said if he had
given her his real reason for taking himself away
from Winchbourne. One thing he was sure of, she
would not be pleased.
As she grew a little older, certain undesirable
qualities peculiar to one of her temperament were
making themselves felt She was, to say the least



<pb n="270"/>
270           A YOUNG MAN
of it, amazingly jealous. There were times when she
fiercely resented Meggy's devotion to himself and
others, when his devotion to the child was unbearable
to her. As she had practically engrossed his whole
thought ever since she could remember, it was a
pretty safe conclusion to suppose that she would have
no very pleasant feeling for any woman he should
love.
He winced sharply when he put the tender remem-
brance of Patricia Prentice in conjunction with these
thoughts of his sister. Carina could be so very hard;
she had her fair share of that cruelty which goes
so frequently with unrestrained emotional natures,
and her present life was not one which encouraged
soft or gentle influences.
When he reached Clifford's Inn and toiled upstairs
to his own room, Sharpus gave a little laugh, a weary
and sad laugh
"Fortunately," he said to himself, "I shan't put
Carina's temper to the test on this point just yet
awhile."
He was back at the hotel about ten o'clock the
next morning, and was met by Baxter with the in-
formation that Mrs. Dalesmere was not yet up. The
maid also further informed him that she had just
despatched a telegram to Paris cancelling the engage-
ment
" Madam talks of going down to Torquay to-day."
Sharpus smiled.
"That means that she will stay here," he said to
himself.



<pb n="271"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             27I
He told Baxter that he would return and lunch
with his sister; and he went down into one of the
big hotel rooms and tried to write a few lines to
Patricia Prentice.
On his way to the hotel he had called at the nursing
home, but had been given no information save that
the surgeons were still with Mrs. Prentice. He asked
if her daughter was there, and they told him that Miss
Prentice had arrived very early, and was waiting for
news.
He could picture her distinctly. Most probably
they had put her in that dark back room where she
sat the day before.
The day was brighter. In the night the tempera-
ture had changed, and some hours of steady rain had
washed the streets clear of slush and mud. In the
country it would be a beautiful day. It gave him
a pang to think of Patsy shut away from the bright,
if wintry sun, hemmed about by horrible suspense
and nervous, yearning heartaching anxiety.
He put down the pen after a while; it was im-
possible to write to her-later on he would try and
see her. Her aunt's pleasant manner encouraged
him, and the position admitted of his calling. But
it was a wearisome day.    Certainly Carina did
nothing to make it bearable. She was cross, restless,
inclined to quarrel. Although her brother made no
further remarks about the broken engagement, she
argued with him unconvincingly for an hour that
she had been perfectly justified in not keeping it.
Of course, the journey to Torquay was abandoned,
mnd as an alternative she proposed that the children
should come to her.



<pb n="272"/>
272           A YOUNG MAN.
This he vetoed. Apart from every other reason,
it became necessary to keep Meggy apart from her
mother.
Catherine Dalesmere did not seem to understand
Meggy. She was proud of the child's beauty, but
she found her dull. And then she had a trick, too,
of talking too openly in front of the children. And
she had the wildest ideas on the subject of their care
and general treatment.                        .
Sharpus had determined that their life must run
on the very simplest and even lines. Carina would
have been capable of keeping Meggy up till midnight,
taking her to the theatre, and even to supper afte-
wards.
"Oh, you are so tiresome!" she flashed at .him
now, when he disposed calmly of one of her innumer
able impossible suggestions. "You are just like
great big old grandmother! They are my chidir i
aren't they? "-to which he shook his head.  ,
"No, they are mine." He averted the s
happily by suggesting that they should go so
where that evening.                       : :;~; 
Carina clapped her hands.                 :':
"To the pantomime!" she said. "It is the 
night, you know. I adore pantomimes, and I shou
love to sing 'God Save the King.' No, it won't h
too late to get tickets; you can get everything ir
England if you pay for it."
It was a relief to leave her and do her bidding
Her shrewdness was justified. He found two seats,
which cost him pretty dearly, and then he went to
seek news of Patricia's mother. The report was
reassuring. Mrs. Prentice, it was stated, was doing



<pb n="273"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             273
as well as could be expected. The operation had
been entirely successful.
He had to dress early, and when he was dressed
he drove to Mrs. Langridge's house and asked for
Patricia.
The maid showed him upstairs into the drawing-
room, and there he found, not Patricia, but Mrs.
Langridge. She greeted him most warmly, and made
him come near the fire and sit down. Then she
said:
"You know, I don't know your name; I call you
'the young man from the country.'"
"My name is Sharpus," he told her-" Anthony
Sharpus. But sometimes I am known by another
name." And he told her this other name.
"Oh," said Mrs. Langridge quickly, "I am glad
to know you! I adore your books; I have them
all, and treasure them in my room. But now I am
a little afraid of you; you are a much, much grander
person than I imagined."
They chatted on current literary topics for a little
while, then they spoke of Patricia and of her mother.
"It is a joy to me to have the child with me,"
said Mrs. Langridge; " only, of course, she is not very
happy. I hope, however, that her little heart will soon
be comforted, and perhaps after this things will be
better for her and for Sheila. I see now that my
sister-in-law must have been a terrible sufferer all
these years. That explains so much. I. wish I had
known of this a little sooner; I should have judged
her less harshly."
Mrs. Langridge added that she feared he would
not be able to see Patsy.
I8



<pb n="274"/>
274           A YOUNG MAN
"She is quite exhausted. She never closed her
eyes all night, and was out of the house before it was
light this morning. I have administered some
bromide, and I hope she will sleep for some hours;
but I shall be delighted if you will stay and dine with
me, Mr. Sharpus."
He had to refuse with very real regret. It would
have been infinitely more pleasant to him to have
stayed with this nice woman than to have sat, as he
would have to sit, through hours of, to him, dreary
pantomime.
However, he promised that he would dine on the
morrow, and in a little while he had to take his,
leave.
This promise was not destined to be fulfilled, for
late in the afternoon of the next day a messenger
reached him bearing a note from Mrs. Langridge.
As he glanced hurriedly through the letter Sharpus
felt stunned. Patricia's aunt wrote in pencil, and
evidently in great agitation, announcing that Mrs.
Prentice was dead; that her heart had failed sud-
denly and unexpectedly, and she had passed away
without a word to anyone.



<pb n="275"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             275
CHAPTER XXVII.
AND so it was that the independence which Sheila
Prentice had so ardently desired had come about in the
easiest and most natural way. Just at first the news
that her mother was dead shocked her very sharply,
but she made no pretence of grief. She shut herself
up in her room for a while, but not to weep. There
was much to occupy her thoughts. It was only pos-
sible to conjecture how Mrs. Prentice might have
disposed of her property, or of what that property
consisted. Sheila had always convinced herself that
her mother was a miser by instinct, not mean by
necessity. At any rate, the prospects for the future
were immensely cleared where her own matters were
concerned by the removal of the one being who had
thwarted Sheila's will from the very beginning, against
whose autocracy she had so hopelessly struggled.
Lady Amelia was full of the kindest thought for the
girl sitting alone upstairs. The tragic news had
reached Sir Francis at the very moment when the
Christmas-tree festivities were about to be started
at the Court. Both his wife and himself would have
been glad to have postponed the entertainment; but,
naturally, Sheila refused to permit this.
I8*



<pb n="276"/>
276           A YOUNG MAN
"It would be absurd," she said to herself, as she 
caught the babel of voices and the sound of laughter
and music from below. "And yet," was her next   ;
bitter thought, "it would have been so like mother  -
to have upset everybody and spoilt everything! I 
am afraid even Mrs. Bartingale would have found it, 
hard to forgive her, dead though she is, if all these ::
people had been turned away."
She fretted at her enforced isolation. Sheila had ;~:
none too much pleasure in her own society; and::
then the thought of the morrow vexed her, too. If  :
she could have avoided going to town she would have
done so; but this was, of course, impossible. Sir -;X
Francis had already settled with her by which train:
she would travel-and her aunt expected her.
Late that night Lady Amelia knocked at Sheila's ;
door. Her manner, rather than her words, conveyed 
the very real sympathy she felt. 
"You must make every use of Frank," she said. 
"I wish I could go with you to-morrow. But please 
remember I am here if you want me; and promise 
me that you will come back to me if you can, and 
if you care to come."
"You know I care," Sheila had answered; "but 
I don't know yet what lies in front of me. I shall 
have to think of Patsy. There will be so much to 'i
do. Perhaps we shall come back to Pitt Place, per-  2
haps we shall stay in town; I don't know."
"When Sophie and her children leave me," said;
Lady Amelia, "we can go to town also." Then 
she kissed Sheila, with that timid, yet tender touch 
in her manner. "Try not to fret too much," she Ad
said, as she went away.                         ?
??.'



<pb n="277"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             277
The journey to London the following day was
taken practically in silence. Sir Francis lavished
every care upon the girl, but he left her to herself.
Sheila's composure chilled him. There had been a
natural note in Patsy's trouble; it had been almost
a happiness to try and comfort her. But Sheila asked
for no sympathy; only once, indeed, did she speak
voluntarily to him.
" Did mother ever tell you that she was ill ?" she
asked. And Sir Francis had shaken his head.
"No; this has come upon me as a shock. From
what Mitchinson told me yesterday morning, I am
afraid she must have had an awfully bad time just
lately. I wish we had known it, we might have done
something for her."
But to this Sheila made no reply. She maintained
that same quiet attitude throughout the course of the
week which followed. Nothing seemed to move her
or distress her, though she had to interview doctors
and nurses, and had to discuss the details of the
funeral. When, however, Sir Francis told her that
he had received a letter written by her mother on
Christmas Day, in which she told him she had
nominated him as trustee to her will, and that she
hoped he would accept the office, Sheila flashed into
passion for a moment. He did not give her the letter
to read, nor did he tell her that that same letter had
moved him to tears.
She had remained silent for a moment, then she
said:
"You will, of course, not bother yourself about
this? Whatever there is for us, we can manage to
look after for ourselves."



<pb n="278"/>
278            A YOUNG MAN
But Sir Francis regarded    the  matter quite
differently.
"I shall, of course, do what your mother wished.
It has touched me very much that she should have
thought of me."
"But if you know I object?" Sheila said hardly. 
And at this the man's face had flushed.
"I don't think you can understand how much that
hurts me, Sheila," he said, a little hoarsely.  A
moment later he added, in a calmer tone: "And, you
see, in this it is not only yourself that is to be con- 
sidered, but Patsy."
He had not seen Patsy. The girl was confined to 
bed; she had contracted a severe cold. And the
shock and the grief which her mother's death signified 
to her had worked to produce a high temperature;
in fact, the girl was really ill.
Sheila left the nursing of her sister to, Mrs. Lang-
ridge. She went into Patsy's room every morning, 
but the girls had not exchanged a word beyond 
commonplace inquiries and greetings. The day her
mother was buried-she had left directions that she 
was to be laid beside her husband in Winchbourne
churchyard-Sheila went to Pitt Place. The few
who were present were greatly astonished when it was 
made known that Mrs. Prentice had left quite a   :
respectable amount of money. Both her girls would 
have an income sufficient to maintain them in com-
fort, if not in luxury. She left it as a wish, but not-as
a command, that Pitt Place should be kept up, and
that they should live there together. Her personal
belongings she divided between them, but she set 
apart a few things to be given to others-some old-



<pb n="279"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             279
fashioned jewellery to Jane Morant, and a number of
old books to the rector.
" You will not come back here directly, I suppose,"
Sir Francis said, as he put Sheila into his motor, in
which she was going to the station.
Sheila looked at him, and her eyes seemed to
blaze.
"Come back here?" she repeated. "I will never
willingly set foot in this place again! Why, don't
you understand it has been my tomb all these years?
And would you have me go on living in a tomb?
No, thank God! we shall get rid of it. It ought to
have been worth some money a few years ago. And
even as it is it will bring us in a few thousands, I
suppose ?"
Sir Francis was wrapping the fur rug about her.
He bit his lip once or twice. He seemed to be under-
standing her a little better every day, and what he
learnt was altogether disillusioning. Yet so powerful
were the bonds which held him to this slim, beautiful
woman that his love for her seemed to grow, her
power over him to become more intense as her true
self was revealed to him. He gave her a message
from his wife, but Sheila shook her head. She
wanted to get away from all that was connected with
the old life.
"I am sorry I cannot see Lady Amelia now, but
you must tell her I shall hope to meet her very soon."
"We are going to town now, immediately," Sir
Francis said. But Sheila made no remark.
She went back to, her aunt's house protestingly.
If Patsy had been well they could have gone off
together somewhere; but Patsy was still ill.  It



<pb n="280"/>
280            A YOUNG MAN
was too annoying. Sheila was in the mood to resent !
most things, and Patsy's bodily prostration vexed her 
beyond measure.
"She is always so extravagant," she said to herself.
"Patsy can never be temperate in anything. And,
after all, she had no more reason to love mother  :!
than I had."
Her real object in wishing to get away was to avoid  i
meeting Heatherington.  But Sir Francis did. noti 
take the advantage of his new position she had ex-; Hi
pected. Once Mrs. Prentice was buried there was 
very little that he could do, at any rate, for the ':
moment; and he remained at Winchboume. Lady     ':z
Amelia was glad in the most conscious way at his 
return, not because she grudged any attention he 
bestowed on Sheila, only because she missed him so 
terribly. Her sister was a definite trial to Lady  :
Amelia. They had not been together so closely for
a number of years, and it was doubtful if they would 
repeat the experiment in a hurry.
Mr. Bryne-Jones had left the day Lord Spar-
brooke went away, and Lawrence Goodborough had
followed the day after. There was really no reason 
why Lady Sophie should have stayed on, except that  :i
she had the usual thrifty mind of the very rich. 
It was dull, it was depressing at Winchbourne
Court, but it would have cost a good deal to have
moved her family, and, until the house in town was. iE
made ready for them, she resolved to accommodate 
herself with all comfort at the Court, happily ignorant  4,
of the fact that Sir Francis positively detested her.
And still the man was almost grateful to Lady Sophie 
for remaining. He had a dread of taking up the
if: i!:



<pb n="281"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             281
threads of the daily life, that monotonous, hopeless
existence which stretched before his wife and himself.
There had been a certain excitement in the events
attending on Mrs. Prentice's death, and he had found
a poor sort of pleasure in doing things for Sheila
The knowledge, too, that her mother had given him
a small place in her life provoked about the nearest
approach to happiness which the man was capable
of feeling just yet. But when this excitement had
calmed down he was able to retrospect, and he found
little that was helpful or agreeable now. In truth,
his intercourse with Sheila in those last few days had
been more than trying. He resented the way in
which she held herself aloof from him. Her very
evident distrust was galling in the extreme.
"Frank is awfully gloomy," Lady Sophie remarked
once to her sister. "He couldn't be more depressing
if he had buried his own mother."
" I think he has had a shock," his wife said, quick
to range herself on his side. "I don't know that
he really cared very much about Mrs. Prentice, but,
at any rate, her death was terribly sad, and Frank
feels these things; he is very sensitive."
She asked him that night when they were alone
if he would care to go away.
"We have done our duty here," she said; "we
could come back again in the spring. I used to hate
going south in the old days, but I should not hate
it to go with you."
Heatherington thanked her.
"I am afraid I can't go away just yet, Amy. There
is a certain amount of business to look after in more
ways than one. We've been making changes in the



<pb n="282"/>
282            A YOUNG MAN 
City, you know, and I want to be on the spot to see  i
how the new arrangements work out" And then
they spoke about Mrs. Prentice and her small estate.;
"I suppose both girls will have to come down for' 
a little while," he said; and Lady Amelia at once !
proposed asking Sheila and her sister to stay at the 
Court.
"It will be so dreary for them at Pitt Place.whilst 
the house is being dismantled? " she said. "Do you
approve of its being sold, Frank ?"
He did not reply at first; then he said:
"From  a point of sentiment, no; but otherwise 
I suppose it's the best thing to do. Anyhow, Sheila
had made up her mind, and if Patsy works in with  |
her, that settles the matter."
" Well, I should like them both to come here," Lady 
Amelia said, and her tone was sincere.
Neither girl, however, accepted the invitation. -
Sheila wrote and explained that it really would not 
be necessary for her to do more than run down for ant 
hour or so to her old home, if indeed she went at all. 
She then explained that she was going on a visit to 
her cousin, Evelyn Cardover.                     i
"If you will ask me to stay with you a little later I
on," she wrote, "I shall be delighted." ;
Lady Amelia showed this letter to Heatherington.  i
"Are they not going to be together ?" she asked. ii
"She doesn't mention her sister." 
He answered with a shrug of his shoulders. By :
the same post Sheila had written to him; she had :
enclosed him her cheque for two hundred pounds.
Her expression of gratitude was graceful enough, but<
it stung the man sharply. Not that he blamed her 
iE , i.



<pb n="283"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             283
for hurrying to discharge a debt which must have
been a veritable blister on her remembrance; it was
the unexpressed resentment which lurked beneath
Sheila's neat phrases which was so bitter to him.
It was now apparent to him at every turn that she
intended to put behind her the knowledge of his
love, to repudiate his claim to any special significance.
There was an incredible amount of hardness in
Sheila's treatment of him. Granted that he had once
laid aside that restraint which his position involved
on him, granted that he had once spoken of that which
burned and tortured his heart, he had accepted her
rebuke, and never afterwards had he given her the
slightest cause for annoyance or trouble. Indeed, he
had tried to play his part simply, naturally, and yet
with dignity, and assuredly though circumstances had
led to his friendship taking a tangible form, it had
been his most eager desire that this should make no
difference with Sheila. He would indeed have had
the fact forgotten, if that had been possible; and
now she showed him with what bitterness she must
have remembered!
His wife's gentleness, her sympathy, her eager and
affectionate interest in Sheila, made the man's burden
just a little heavier. Sheila's power over him was
peculiar in one respect; she made him feel that if
there was an element of wrong in the simple secret
which they shared, that wrong lay so entirely to his
account.
He sent her no acknowledgment of her letter, and
he did not see her again for some time; but he saw
Patsy. He never knew what had passed between the
sisters on the subject of their mother's wishes, but



<pb n="284"/>
284           A YOUNG MAN                    :i
when he saw Patsy he guessed that her submission 
to Sheila's will had not been given easily. It was
just by chance that he heard that the younger girli
was at Pitt Place, and he went over immediately.
Everything about the place had a desolate looki
Heatherington shivered as he passed in through 
old hall, in which already the furniture had been c
logued, and all was prepared for the sale.  i
"You'll find Miss Patsy in the library, sir," the 
cook told him; she was the only servant remaining
Patsy was sitting on the floor going through some
drawers and boxes of old letters. The dogs wee
with her; they gave a violent and cheery greeting t;
Sir Francis.
Patsy just nodded to him.
"I am so dirty, Frank, I can't offer to shake hands
"Why didn't you let me know you had com
down?" he queried.
"I was going to let you know some time to-day
but there was so much to do. Ever so long ago 
promised mother I would destroy all these old paper
She had sorted them out, so I have nothing to do by,
tear them up and bur them."
" But you'll freeze here," said Heatherington. "I
bitterly cold out to-day."
" I don't feel cold," said Patsy. " I feel as if I
suffocating." 
Indeed, she looked as if the youth-that bonnd
bright look of her's-had been burned out of her.
Sir Francis knew she had been ill, but he olA
realised how ill when he looked at her now.
"I don't think you ought to be here doing t
the man said awkwardly.               ' A     !
' X       ;  ' X'



<pb n="285"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            285
"That's what Aunt Judith said, but I had to come.
And she was awfully good; she gave way, and let me
come by myself. Poor old Jane Morant entreated
me to let her come down, but that I couldn't stand.
I hope somebody will remember me as Jane re-
members mother when I die!"
"Can I help you ?" asked Sir Francis.
She shook her head, and then she said:
"But I am going to ask you a big favour. Will
you take the dogs, Frank? I am going abroad with
Aunt Judith for about a month, and I have nowhere
to leave them. Even when I come back I am not sure
I can have them. Sheila says dogs are awful
nuisances in London; and we're going to live in
London, you know."
Heatherington was sitting on one of the dusty
chairs, bending forward, with his hands clasped be-
tween his knees.
"No; I didn't know," he said. " I didn't imagine
that Sheila had made any plans just yet"
"I suppose we ought to have consulted you,
oughtn't we?"
As he made no answer, Patsy said, not very
distinctly:
"I can't bear the thought of selling Pitt Place; it
seems so cruel to her-poor thing! You know how
she loved her home and all belonging to it And
then she wanted us to be here I-"  she paused.
"But then Sheila says I am a sentimentalist, and
we've got to live, and it seems we can't live unless
we do sell this house. And oh, Frank, that reminds
me! " restlessly. "I have another favour to ask you.
Will it be possible for me to buy up all the things in



<pb n="286"/>
286            A YOUNG MAN
the dressing-room and in mother's room? I must
have them if I can, and I thought you would see to
this for me. I can store them somewhere. I did
think of taking a little cottage and living in it, and
getting Jane to live with me; but Sheila doesn't like
that idea. She says we must be together."
She tore up a number of papers in silence, and then
she got up and stretched herself.
"Aunt Judith wanted us to stay with her at least.
for some months, but Sheila doesn't care for that.
Sheila doesn't care for anything nowadays, not even
for me."
"Don't cry!" said Heatherington quickly; and
he got up.
Patsy moved about the big dusty room restlessly.
"I am not crying," she said in a choked voice. "I
don't believe I have a tear left, I've cried so much."
He did all he could to persuade her to go back with
him to the Court and stay there, but she refusedf
steadily. 
"You see," she said, "it's like this. I'm not going 
to have very much of what I care about in the future,
just let me have this little bit. You think I shall be
miserable here; you don't understand, Frank. This
old house seems part of myself. The very walls are 
friends, and there is an actual, a lovely sense of  i
comfort in just touching the old shabby things which i:
I have known all my life."
He had to leave her after awhile, but he saw her )f
every day. And Patsy had other visitors-Mrs. 
Mitchinson and the rector's wife-who showed such  :
real kindness and sympathy and regret that Patsy  :
found that, after all, she had a few more tears to shed



<pb n="287"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            287
CHAPTER XXVIII.
IT was just about Easter when Sheila and her sister
established themselves in the small flat the elder girl
had chosen. Patricia and Sheila had seen very little
of one another during the early spring months.
Patsy had gone abroad with her aunt, and Sheila,
after a short visit to her cousin, Lady Cardover, had
returned to town and had accepted Lady Sophie's
hospitality. Immediately it had become known that
Pitt Place was in the market various people had
come forward with offers for it. Sheila proved in
this her capacity for driving a hard bargain. When
Patsy heard that the old place had been sold to
one of the farmers (a man who for many years had
cast covetous eyes *on the property and who had
been absolutely detested by Mrs. Prentice in conse-
quence) she went out alone, and she wept bitterly.
She was at Biarritz, and on this day for once the
sun had refused to shine and the smooth sea was
broken into, giant waves which beat with restless
anger on the coast. This grey day, this day of
cold and gloom, matched well with Patsy's spirit.
She was slow in recovering and Mrs. Langridge
fretted about her a good deal, delaying her return



<pb n="288"/>
288            A YOUNG MAN
to town to give the girl's health and heart a chance
of getting back to their normal condition. Sheila
wrote long letters to Patsy, full of business. The
sale of Pitt Place had brought them in a tidy sum
of money, which    Heatherington  was investing.
Sheila had taken the flat and ordered the new 
furniture in their joint names before she gave any 
hint of what she had in her mind.
And Mrs. Langridge denounced everything in ;i
connection with this undertaking. She said very 
little to Patricia, but when she was back in London
she spoke very frankly to Sheila, 
" It is preposterous to box yourselves up in a tiy
place and saddle yourselves with housekeeping when
my house is open to you. Of course you will both
marry before long, and your proper place is with noe."
"There is no 'of course' where marriage is con-
cerned," Sheila had said quietly. "We may marry,
but we may not; at any rate, there is no immediate ,
prospect of this, and if you don't mind my saying
so quite frankly, Aunt Judith, I think mixed house- i:
holds an abomination. We should quarrel all the  :
time. Then please remember we have had a life- '.:.
time of repression and we want to have something
different now-at least I do, and as Patsy prefers 
to live with me I expect my views are her views."
"I am disappointed," 'Mrs. Langridge said. Later
she confided to Patsy that Sheila was absolutely
the most aggravating creature she had ever known.
"Talk of your poor mother," she exclaimed, "she
wasn't in it with Sheila. I never met anyone so
hard to deal with, so self-willed."
She had left nothing untried to persuade Patricia
*



<pb n="289"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             289
to remain on with her, but in this at least Patsy
proved as obstinate as her sister. " Sheila wants me
and we must be together," she had said.
It was purely as a concession to conventionality
that Miss Prentice consented to having a chaperon
and after a great deal of deliberation allowed Patsy
to have her way and bring Miss Morant to the little
flat. " But if this must be," Sheila had said, "please
understand that there is to be no interference.  If
Jane begins any of her old tricks, out she goes."
"So," said Patsy to Miss Morant when the matter
was being settled, "whatever you feel, Jane, keep to
yourself, or if you must break out, then say all you
want to say to me, there's a dear!"
But Miss Morant was much subdued in these days.
The death of her old friend had been a great grief
to her; the shock had aged her.
When she had arrived with her modest luggage
Sheila had, of course, found fault with the mourning
garb she wore.
"In Heaven's name, where does Jane buy such
awful clothes? I thought when she came in just
now she was a charwoman.    She must get some-
thing decent if she is to be seen about with us. As
you brought her here I expect you to look after her.
And while you are about it you might get yourself
some clothes."
For a moment Patsy trembled with a passion
which came to her at odd times now, but the angry
words which rushed to her lips were not spoken.
Instead she went to her own room and sat there
till she felt calm again. Then she sought Miss
Morant.
19



<pb n="290"/>
290            A YOUNG MAN
"Jane," she said, "the verdict has been passed
upon us that we are a discredit to the establishment.
If we cannot be really respectable, at least we are
to assume an outward aspect of respectability. Jane,
put on your bonnet, you are to come shopping wit
me, my dear."
Sheila spared no trouble to make the flat very
pretty, but Patsy hated it. The rooms were so smal,
the furniture so modern and everything was so new.
"I feel just as I used to feel when I was a little;
child and they dressed me up in a starched froc
Oh! Jane, if there was only a little bit of ground
where I could roll!   Thank iGod the dogs :aie
having a good time."
She had a quarrel with Sheila about her own
room.
"You can't sleep in a place with no proper things
in it," Sheila exclaimed. But, Patsy was firm.
"If you want me to go mad you'll crowd me- up
in that little hole. I don't want a wardrobe, or an
arm-chair, or a writing-table.  I want to have a
place where I can breathe."
So her furniture was distributed about the flat,
and her only piece of decoration was an old-
fashioned bookshelf, on which reposed a number of
old treasures and several new ones.
When her aunt had told her that he was a writer,
she had given a gasp:
"Why didn't I guess that?" she asked herself,
and when she knew under what name he wrote then
there flashed into her life something warm and
living and beautiful. She went out immediately
aid bought all his books and from that day she



<pb n="291"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             291
developed an absolute appetite for newspapers.
The merest mention of him made her thrill, and yet
she was always trembling in case Jane Morant
should speak about him; as for seeing him again,
that was something vague and unattainable. But
she dreamed of him very, very often, and sometimes
the dreams were so sweet. He would come back to
her sitting- dose beside her in that cab which
trundled so slowly through the snow, and she would
feel the actual warmth of his handclasp. Then at
other times her dream-memory visioned him with
the child in his arms, that little, lovely, dainty child,
of whom Patsy was so terribly jealous.
He had written her just a few simple words after
her mother had been buried, and all the time she had
been abroad that little letter had lain in a silken
case close, very close, to her heart.  But after that
one letter (which she had not been able to answer)
he had never written again.     Sometimes Mrs.
Mitchinson, who kept up a regular correspondence
with Patsy, mentioned the children. It would seem
that now the winter had passed the Treasury Farm-
house had beeen opened again and the little people
were in residence there every now and then.
Patsy had many invitations to go back to the
country also. There would always be a welcome for
her at the Rectory, or with the doctor and his wife,
and Lady Amelia's invitation was a standing one;
but she could not venture on this journey just yet
awhile. And yet she would have been so glad to
have escaped from the existing conditions if this had
been possible.
Life in that little flat was not a tranquil matter.
19*



<pb n="292"/>
292            A YOUNG MAN
Someone was always ringing the electric bell; the
lift seemed to be used only for passengers to and
fro to Miss Prentice's dainty little home; motor-cars
waited down   in the street and   the telephone
clamoured incessantly. Sheila had not been long in
making a new sphere of her own. She made friends
quickly, yet withb  extraordinary  discrimination;
Patsy soon remarked on this.
"Do you know, Jane, we don't know a single poor,
person! All our acquaintances blaze with jewels,
are hung with priceless ropes of pearls, and have at f
least six motor-cars each. It is so oppressive to
meet so much money walking about."
But Miss Morant was amazingly proud of Sheila's
social success.
"It is what your dear mother always felt would
happen, Patsy," she made answer to this remark.
"You see, Sheila is quite unusually beautiful."
"I know she used to be," the girl said hurriedly;
and then she grew very hot and bit her lip almost
savagely; for remembrance brought with it those
bitter tears which were so foolish, in Sheila's opinion,
so unnerving to Patsy herself.
She kept very much in the background, and little
by little she was left there. Had she spent money
on clothes, and allowed her bright spirit free play,
she would have been voted every whit as delightful,
if not so actually pretty, as her sister. But Patsy
had no heart for clothes, and the hot sunshine only
brought to her an almost unconquerable longing for
the country, with its freedom and its simple and
uncounted joys.
Lady Sophie Bryne-Jones had practically adopted



<pb n="293"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            293
Miss Prentice. It gave her such pleasure to super-
sede her sister in this. The Heatheringtons had
come to town for a few weeks, and 'Lady Amelia
would have been only too ready in her timid way to
pilot Sheila through her first experience of social life.
Miss Prentice would have had no hesitation in
making full use of Heatherington's wife, if this had
been necessary, but she had no intention of letting
herself be monopolised by anybody-moreover, Lady
Amelia bored her terribly. Where Heatherington
was concerned she had the satisfaction of realising
that he accepted the position she had decreed he
must occupy. Still, there lurked always the bitter
thought that here was one who felt he had a claim
upon her; one who could not possibly be expected
to applaud her ambitions or congratulate her on
whatever she might achieve.    And to Sheila's
arrogant spirit the knowled  ththat such a claim
existed was trying beyond measure. This, and this
alone, remained to shadow the brilliancy of the
moment. For, after months of secret fear and
fretting anxiety, and all the horror of dealing with a
base extortionist, there had come perfect tranquillity.
Sometimes she paused to wonder what had pro-
duced this, and at such moments would grudgingly
allow herself to imagine that possibly Heatherington
had come to her rescue a second time and had taken
upon himself to deal with her enemy. But then
would come the reflection that, unless he had been
directly approached, it would have been impossible
for Sir Francis to have taken up this matter; and
somehow, she did not think it likely that the man
who had drained her small resources so shamefully



<pb n="294"/>
294            A YOUNG MAN
would have cared to risk approaching a stranger, and
another man.
"Besides "-as Sheila mused once-" he is not to
know that Frank is in any way interested in me;
and it certainly would not be a clever move to put
himself in danger of being handed over to the police.
Perhaps that hundred I sent really did satisfy him,
as he swore it should. Or perhaps something has
happened to him. If I could only know that he was
dead!"
A few months before it had been her own death
she had wished for; but Sheila had progressed a
long way from that old self of hers. Power, freedom,
success, the certainty of obtaining anything on which
she now set her heart, had worked a great change in
her. Had she been guilty of that old folly in her
present mental condition, she would assuredly have
judged herself far more leniently than she had done
in the past.
There would, of course, always linger the hateful
remembrance that she had been fooled; but for the
rest-well, as she had told herself that night at
Winchbourne Court, few women could afford to open
their hearts and scatter the secrets and the histories
stored up in them  to the four winds of heaven.
That she should drift gradually into a sense of
security as the time passed and no sign was made,
no attempt to renew the old demands reached her,
was so   natural.  And  the  less she   saw  of
Heatherington the less she was reminded of that
miserable business.
Patsy was sorry when Lawrence Goodborough
stopped coming to the flat. Though he rarely spoke



<pb n="295"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              295
of Sharpus, she felt that he must see the other man
frequently. Once he told her that the children were
in London, and after that Patsy haunted the Park,
and spent hours looking for Meggy's exquisite little
face. She gleaned all sorts of delights and know-
ledge in this pursuit of one child among such
hundreds of others.  She had never known that
children could be so fascinating.
At first Sheila had set down a hard and fast rule
that Patsy must never go out alone; but, of course,
this rule was broken. By degrees Miss Prentice
found that she had need of the chaperon more than
her sister, and as her social engagements increased
she forgot to interfere with Patsy and her little likes
and dislikes.
Her independent wanderings made a faint kind of
pleasure for Patsy. She filled her otherwise empty
life with looking after Miss Morant, whose eager
attempts to give satisfaction, whose pride at having
been chosen to live with "dear Julia's girls," were so
pathetic.
To Miss Morant had been deputed the cares of
housekeeping, and veritable cares they were, for
Sheila was a harder ruler than ever her mother had
been and farthings had to be strictly accounted for.
The weekly books were Miss Morant's deadly
enemies and here Patsy proved an invaluable ally.
"Groaning again, Jane, what's wrong now? Oh I
the usual mistake in the butcher's bill. Well, you
give me the book and I'll go round and read the riot
act to that girl in the desk.  She has such pretty
eyes she can't be expected to do sums properly.
Look here, this gravy beef must go-"



<pb n="296"/>
296           A YOUNG MAN 
Miss Morant had to protest feebly.
"But, Patricia, dear, we did have the gravy beef
for soup-you   remember it was on Thursday,
when-"
" Oh, well, that soup disagreed with us," said Patsy
coolly, "and when things disagree with us we never
pay for them."
She marched off with the book as she spoke. By
paying for the gravy beef and having the item struck
off the account she could temporarily stand between
Jane and Sheila's wrath.
"It is so funny that Sheila grew to hate mother,
because, poor soul, she was so hard to deal with, and
yet now she is just every bit as bad herself. What
does it matter-what can it matter-if the butcher'sw
book is three shillings heavier than it ought to be?
As we have money to pay for these things, why not
pay and be done with them?"
It was she who had fixed the salary Miss Morant
received. Sheila fretted at the amount, and it was
only by small subtleties that Patsy managed to pro-
tect the over-anxious, elderly woman from feeling
that she was a burden.
Once when Sheila spoke of changing Miss Morant
for someone whom Lady Sophie had recommended
Patsy flared out:
"If Jane goes, I go!  What has come to you,
Sheila, that you should be so cruel? Poor Jane!
Don't you know she'd crawl from here to St. Paul's
on her knees to please you? And you never give
her a kind word."
Sheila was at her writing-table and went on with
her letters without looking up.



<pb n="297"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             297
"I never cared for Jane Morant, and I only con-
sented to her coming here because you insisted on
this. She reminds me too much of old times."
"Yes, she does, and that is one of the many
reasons why I love to have her here," said Patsy
rebelliously.
Sheila shrugged her shoulders.
"Your memory is conveniently short.    I can
remember when you used to rail at things much
more forcibly than I ever did. And now you do all
you can to make me believe that you were happy in
the old days and that you are miserable now, which
is pure nonsense, and you know it."
Patsy calmed herself.
"We shan't do any good by talking over these
kind of things."
"Well, you began the discussion," said Sheila.
She put down her pen and rose as she spoke.
Patsy caught her breath. " I only want to let you
know that I protest against your sending Jane away.
I am not joking Sheila; if she goes, then I shall
go too."
Sheila laughed.
"That is what one might call driving me into a
corner. I presume I shall have to suffer Jane,
because, strange as it may seem, I don't wish to
separate from you."
The words touched Patsy and brought the tears
to her eyes, but Sheila went on speaking about some
other matters and the subject was dropped.
Miss Morant never knew how near she had been
to dismissal, but Patsy was just a little kinder to her
and more thoughtful than even she had been before.



<pb n="298"/>
298            A YOUNG MAN
And so the weeks went by and summer came to     :
its own.
Sitting under the trees, far, far away from t :
carriages and the throng of people, it was pleasant
and almost countrified. When the sun became very
hot, Patsy shed her black gown and wore one of her :
old white ones.  She would take a book out with 
her sometimes, but more often she had nothing
except a bag of broken bread and biscuits for theS
ducks, and some "goodies "-not for the rich, smart
pretty children, but for the gutter grubs, who really
made her heart ache.
Mrs. Langridge got to know of these independent
wanderings, after a time, and protested.  She sent :i
for Patsy.
"If Sheila can get on as well without you, I want I
you," she said. " Evelyn was only talking about you 
yesterday. She said the last time she called at the ::
flat you never appeared. I believe she thought you :
were in the kitchen."
"It would not be the first time," Patsy said. ':
"But don't be alarmed, Aunt Judith; I really am all, ;
right. Sheila does not ill-treat me, as Evelyn evi- 
dently supposes; she is very good to me, for she  :
leaves me alone."
"If she is good to you, you are about the only
person who can say that," Mrs. Langridge observed 
sharply. "You know, of course, she has refused
Lawrence Goodborough?" she queried the next 
moment.
Patsy started.
"I know nothing," she said in a low voice. 
So that was why Mr. Goodborough never came 
X,- :.i



<pb n="299"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            299
to the flat nowadays! Why those lovely boxes of
flowers had ceased to arrive!
"I am   simply exasperated with Sheila," Mrs.
Langridge declared forcibly. "I never got on with
your poor mother, as you know, but Julia was never
half so trying as Sheila is. What does she want ?
Why should she drop us? Evelyn is quite huffed.
She was ready to do everything for you two girls,
and Sheila can't find time even to lunch with her.
She is always with that odious Lady Sophie Bryne-
Jones. If she chose Frank Heatherington's wife it
would be another matter."
Patsy had to listen to a great deal in this strain,
and whilst it oppressed her, she felt unable to take
up any defence of Sheila, for in truth she was so far
away from her sister in these times.
One thing, however, she persisted in maintaining
and that was, that her present Cinderella lot was her
own choice, and on the whole not an unhappy one.
"It is because Sheila is so angry with me for not
dressing up and going about with her that she leaves
me to myself; and, Aunt Judith, if you really care
about me you won't upset this."
Mrs. Langridge allowed herself to be coaxed, but
only on the condition that Patsy went to see her
more frequently; further, she booked the girl to a
dinner engagement a week or so hence.
"Mr. Sharpus is coming, and has promised to
bring his sister, Carina Starelli, if she has no engage-
ment. You have not met his sister, have you?"
Patsy said "No," in a very little voice, and felt
her heart give a great jump.
"She is quite beautiful, but a very uncertain



<pb n="300"/>
300            A  YOUNG MAN
person; one can never rely on her. She was sing-
ing at the Cheshires last night.  Such a glorious
voice!  Lady Cheshire has taken her up violently.
She is really a Mrs. Dalesmere, a widow. I fancy
her marriage was not quite a success, but then these
gifted, irresponsible creatures cannot be bound by
conventionality, I suppose. Patsy, my dear, you are
eating nothing."
"I am not hungry," the girl said. She was like
one dazed; she felt she was drawing so near to him, 
so very, very near.
"She has three children," Mrs. Langridge chatted,
on, "and someone was telling me the other day that
Anthony   Sharpus has practically adopted these
children, although the boy will eventually have
money when his grandmother dies. I hear, too, that 
the brother has been an angel to his sister.  She is
certainly a fascinating soul, but I should think she
would be a bit of a trial. By the way, you must
have seen the children, Patsy, for Mr. Sharpus told
me they lived with him, and that he went to the
country almost entirely on their account. There are
very few bachelors who would be bothered with;
other people's children. But Mr. Sharpus is different
to most men; he is a dear thing; I am devoted to
him!"
Back in the drawing-room, Mrs. Langridge insisted
that Patsy should sing to her.
"I am very rusty, Aunt Judith, for I have not
sung for months," the girl said. Nevertheless, she
sang gladly. All at once the music was so needful,
so beautiful to her. As she sat at the piano there
suddenly flashed back to her memory the vision of



<pb n="301"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            301
that night when she and Sheila had driven home
from Winchbourne Court in the motor-car, and Sheila
had discussed Sharpus.
" Perhaps he played his wife's accompaniments,"
Sheila had said, a sneer in her languid voice-a
sneer which had stung.
And Patsy had gone to bed and wept piteous
tears at the mere repetition of that phrase. And
now it would seem that there never had been a wife
-only a sister; and that the children were not his
children; neither did the beauty in little Meggy's
face bring back to him the memory of a vanished
and a beloved wife!
"I will drive you home," Mrs. Langridge said after
awhile and the songs had come to an end. She went
out of the room as she spoke, but Patsy did not hear
her going. She sat on at the piano, her hands rest-
ing in her lap, her spirit held in spell by the most
amazing the most adorable sensation.



<pb n="302"/>
302            A YOUNG MAN
CHAPTER XXIX.
THE Heatheringtons had no house of their own in
town. Occasionally Sir Francis talked of buying
one, but in this, as in many things, he changed his !
mind frequently. It was characteristic of him at this ;
time that he seemed to be able to settle to nothing. ,
He had developed a kind of fractious mood, he found
fault so easily; he who had never given a harsh word  I
to a servant was now constantly at war with those
who waited on him.   A cloud had settled on his :
former sunny disposition, he seemed to have lost  :
interest in all his former favourite pursuits. His wife
noted  these things with a heart which ached
unceasingly. New phases of suffering came to her
daily. To be in London was a great trial to her,
for in London, far more than in the country, the
miserable truth of their marriage was pressed home. :
She had ceased to call it a mistake, she called it a 
wrong, and upon her, and her alone, rested the burden
of this wrong. As far as was possible she avoided
contact with her mother and her sister, or any of
her near relations, and was thankful that Heathering-
ton had no close tie, for it would have been terrible
to have encountered in open fashion the reproach



<pb n="303"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             303
which devastated her heart. One pleasure, and one
only, had been associated for Lady Amelia with this
prospective sojourn in town, and that had been the
pleasure she had promised herself of being with
Sheila Prentice. Before she had left Winchbourne
Court, Lady Amelia had made many little plans of
her own, in all of which Sheila figured largely. She
had resolved to give her husband as much freedom
as he desired to take, and in the companionship of
this girl whom she had grown to love so quickly and
yet so surely, she had resolved to find such solace as
was possible in the separation from him. When the
Court had been empty, and they had been alone,
Lady Amelia had forced herself to look on many
truths.  Philosopher she was not, but certitude of
inexorable facts begat a relentless sense of endurance,
and before this even jealousy fell back. Indeed, the
futility of such a passion where she was concerned
was so obvious. She had progressed far beyond the
reach of those emotions which follow so closely in
the train of love. Yet strong as was the grip of that
bitter resignation, there were little things which
could penetrate it-sufferings which could sting and
poison, and her husband's care of her, his gentleness
to her, were among these. She would have almost
welcomed his impatience, have found solace in the
feeling that he vented some of this ill-temper on her.
But, however irritable he might be with others, he
was gentleness itself with her, and his chivalrous
solicitude, his eagerness to anticipate the least of her
wishes, were so pitifully eloquent! They placed her
so irrevocably beyond the realm of wifely companion-
ship, they took from her the power to hope for a



<pb n="304"/>
304           A YOUNG MAN
possibility of reaching some haven of mutual com-
prehension and sympathy.
She was now constantly urging Sir Francis to
study himself.
"Last year about this time you went to Norway,"
she said once; "why not go again ?"
To which Heatherington made his invariable
answer:
"All right, I'll go if you'll come along. And if
not I shan't go."
Another time she tried to persuade him to go to
Scotland; this was when they were in town.
"Sophie was here yesterday," she told him, " and
she asked me if I was never going to let you have a
little time to yourself ? It seems, so Ernest says, that
somebody has christened me your nurse."
Heatherington turned very white, and said some-
thing so ugly and violent about Lady Sophie that
his wife's heart beat nervously.
"Why the devil can't they let us alone?" Sir
Francis asked, then he took Lady Amelia's hand and
kissed it tenderly.
"Don't listen to Sophie, she only comes here to
try and upset you. The fact is Sophie is jealous
because we get along so well together. If she could 
make a little mischief between us she would be
quite happy."
Lady Amelia smiled faintly, but when she was
alone she stood with her lips pressed to the hand he
had kissed and the tears ran down her cheeks. She
began to understand him so much better now. She
read his dogged determination to play the game, to
hoodwink the world, to make what was impossible



<pb n="305"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.              305
seem a certainty. And she saw that in his conscious
anxiety to protect her he was going too far, pro-
voking just that very result he was so eager to avert.
This little scene was a kind of crisis. The sug-
gestion that he was exposing himself to ridicule
strung up her sensitive pride to action. She fell into
step with him. Instead of urging a separation, of
trying to persuade him to go here or there, she
adapted herself as easily as she knew how to his
views.  They were constantly together, a state of
things aided considerably by Sheila's avoidance of
them. It was a real sorrow to Heatherington's wife
when she found that the friendship which had
become so beautiful a thing in her eyes had no
serious import for Sheila. But just because she loved
she made excuses.
"There is so little in my life to amuse or interest,"
she told herself. " I was all very well in the country,
but here in the world it is different."
Then, too, she found it so natural that Sheila
should have reached social success so quickly.  She
was proud of this fact. She loved to hear Sheila's
unusual beauty extolled, she watched Miss Prentice's
-progress with the warm delight a mother might have
felt. Except for that memorable friendship with-her
husband, she had never known the pleasure or felt
the need of a friend till Sheila came, and even though
she saw Sheila so rarely now, her affection was
untouched, her sentiment unchanged.
Heatherington was not so generous. The girl's
studied indifference to his wife provoked him to hot
anger at first, and after this had died down a little
he confessed to himself that Sheila's attitude was
20



<pb n="306"/>
306            A YOUNG MAN
undoubtedly based on the necessity for being
cautious. Sir Francis had not been blind to the sly
merriment with which Bryne-Jones had summed up
the situation when at Winchbourne Court, nor to
Lady Sophie's intention to endow that situation with
objectionable features. It was the existence of the
truth lying at the root of the sneers and laughter of
Lady Sophie and her kind which was so bitterly hard
for Heatherington to bear. It served, however, to
strengthen him in certain resolutions. Unlike his
wife, he made a point of going to see her mother
every now and then, and when he went he did his
best to garb himself, as far as was possible, in his old
likeness. He never quite knew how far he impressed
the woman of the world whom he endeavoured to
deceive, but if he failed to carry absolute conviction,
he did at least inspire the duchess with very real
admiration for him, which was certainly not the
sentiment she bestowed on either of her other
daughters' husbands.
Once or twice, after they had gone to London,
Heatherington and his wife ran down to the Court
for a few days, but though he loathed town and all
it signified to him, the man had to drift back again
to the place where Sheila was. And yet he went
very seldom to that little flat in Kensington, and he
never saw Sheila except in a crowd. When he had
occasion to write he addressed his letter to Patsy, and
now and then Patsy and he would meet; sometimes
he would waylay her in the park and sit with her
awhile under the trees. Sometimes, when he knew
Sheila would not be there, he would go and have
tea with her. Once he said to her:



<pb n="307"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             307
"When are you going to start the little cottage,
Patsy? Remember, I have all the things you wanted
stored and waiting for you."
Patsy had changed colour.
"Oh, Frank!" she had answered, "that cottage
has gone so far into the distance I can hardly see
it now."
" But you will have to make some plans for your-
self soon?"
There was a curious inflection in Sir Francis's voice,
a note which made Patsy look at him sharply.
"Why soon, Frank?"
"Because Sheila will be making new plans now
directly, unless I am very much mistaken, and you
won't be considered in those plans, Patsy, my dear."
The girl remained silent, then she said:
"I think you are wrong. I mean I think you are
wrong to suppose Sheila will not consider me. She
would do an awful lot for me now if I would let her.
But that is the trouble, we can't go the same road."
After a little while she asked him:
"Do you honestly think Sheila is going to be
married, Frank?"
He shrugged his shoulders. "It is what people
say. They're bound to chatter and gossip about her."
Patsy pondered on this very much when she was
alone. She awakened in this time to the realisation
that life had been moving very quickly of late.
Sometimes it seemed to Patsy years since the old,
uneventful life at Pitt Place. All that had happened
just before Christmas had a veiled, an indistinct out-
line, and some things which had been so real had
ceased to have existence at all, even as a memory.
20*



<pb n="308"/>
308            A YOUNG MAN
Her anxiety about Sheila, her unexpressed fear and
doubt were part of those things which had died
altogether.
Certainly there was no need to trouble about Sheila
now, and Patsy recalled with regret and a little
shame how nervous she had grown, and above all
how much she had disapproved of Sheila's friend-
ship with the Heatheringtons.
"And after all it was only my absurd imagination.
It is a good thing Sheila did not guess what was in
my mind! "
In early July, Sheila and Miss Morant went out of
town for a few days. A motor excursion had been
arranged by some of Miss Prentice's new friends, to
which Patsy had been invited in a perfunctory
manner.   She refused  the invitation  of course,
refused also to have her movements arranged for her
during Sheila's absence.
"I shall be perfectly all right here and I certainly
am not going to make a convenience of Aunt Judith's
house. She would have every right to be angry, I
think, if I invited myself to stay with her now, after
refusing to go so many other times."
"Oh, very well!" said Sheila pettishly. "Do as
you like. You are as obstinate as a pig."
"Thanks," said Patsy.
They parted in this mood, and just for awhile
Patsy's spell of freedom was shadowed, but not for
long. Although she was fairly independent as a
rule, she had at times to answer questions and give a
kind of compte rendu of her doings. Now there
would be no one to question.
Her first day she spent at Winchbourne. She



<pb n="309"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             309
avoided going in the dircetion of Pitt Place, but paid
visits to the Rectory and to Mrs. Mitchinson.
From Mrs. Bartingale she heard all sorts of news,
in particular about the children at the Treasury Farm.
Someone had written to the rector's wife giving all
the story, and she was full of it.
"And that little boy will be ever so rich. He
inherits everything when old Mrs. Dalesmere dies.
There is a great feud now between his grandmother
and Mr. Sharpus. She wants to have the children,
and he won't let them go.. It was old Mrs. Dalesmere
who came down here in the winter and made such a
fuss at the farm, Patricia. You heard about that,
didn't you?"
"So Mr. Sharpus is not a burglar after all," Patsy
said, whenthe need of saying something was pressed
on her.
Mrs. Bartingale had cast all past condemnation
from her.
"He is a very delightful man-a most dis-
tinguished man," she said impressively, "and a great
writer. Wasn't it foolish of him, my dear Patricia,
not to let any of us know who he was?   He has
promised to lunch with us the next time he is down
here. He pops up and down frequently."
"It seems to me," Patsy said, as she wended her
way back to town after tea with Mrs. Mitchinson,
"that everybody sees Mr. Sharpus, except me.
I-I do think he might remember me a little."
The next day she bought a five shilling ticket for
a great charity concert. The name of the singer she
longed to hear was announced in enormous letters
on the hoardings.



<pb n="310"/>
310           A YOUNG MAN
The cheap seats were uncomfortably crowded, and
the day was oppressively hot. From her corner,
perched up on high, however, Patsy had a good view
of the body of the hall, and her eyes wandered busily
and eagerly in search of a certain person-the one
person, indeed, who out of all the world she craved
to see.
Apparently, however, Anthony Sharpus was not
present, or, at least, she could not see him. When
his sister was led on to the platform, Patsy trembled
with excitement. Even so far away, she could see
how pretty the other woman was. Carina was
exquisitely dressed in white, and her appearance was
the signal for a veritable storm of applause. Her
singing was a revelation of beauty to the girl listen-
ing so intently. There was a timbre in the voice
which struck a sort of poignant note, which brought
the tears to Patsy's eyes. When she had sung again
and again, and at last had disappeared, Patsy got up.
The concert was only half over, but she did not want
to hear any more. To get out she had to push her
way through a great throng of people who were
standing at the back, and as she tried to penetrate
this crowd, someone caught her by the arm. Just
for a moment she was too confused with delight
to speak to him, and let him draw her out of the
hot atmosphere into one of the stone passages like a
creature magnetised. There she found her voice:
"What are you doing here?" she asked faintly.
"What are you doing here? " he answered. "Why
are you alone, and why are you up in this stuffy
place?"
She shrugged her shoulders.



<pb n="311"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             311
"You see I am having a stolen pleasure, so I
came where I thought no one would see me, but
you, surely you ought to be down below in that
galaxy of fashion and beauty?"
They stood by one of the open windows; there
was very little air, but what there was came to them
refreshingly.
"I always come up here in preference when my
sister is singing; her voice carries so well, and
besides, though I have heard her so often, I am
always nervous when she is on the platform."
" It is the most beautiful voice I have ever heard,"
Patsy said.
He corrected her.
"No. I have heard at least one other which
touches me far, far more surely."
Patsy blushed, and when the rich rush of colour
had faded out of her cheeks he noticed with a pang
that she was much changed. She had grown thin,
and the old mischievous smiles seemed to have said
farewell to her lips.
" Surely, you are a little taller," he said.
Just for an instant something of the old look
flashed into her face.
"Don't tell me that I am a child, it isn't true."
"What are you then?" he asked in a low voice,
that voice which brought the colour like magic into
her pale cheeks.
"I don't know," she answered. "I don't think I
am anything particular. I stopped being anything
when I left Pitt Place. Why aren't you in the
country?" she asked him suddenly. "I was there
yesterday-it was so lovely to be able to breathe.



<pb n="312"/>
312           A YOUNG MAN 
You are free, you can do as you like."  Almost
directly she said, "You are great friends with Aunt
Judith, I hear; that makes me so glad."
He was looking at her intently.
"Are you really alone?" he asked her, as she
ceased speaking. "Will you let me take you out of
this?  May you drive with me to Kensington
Gardens, it will be cooler there ?"
She agreed without any hesitation, and felt as if
she were treading on air as they went down the stone
steps together.
There was a motor-car waiting outside the door
through which the artistes passed, and he gave a
message to the chauffeur.
"Oh! I hope I am not taking you away," Patsy
said a little nervously. "Perhaps your sister will
want you ?"
He shook his head with a smile.
"On an occasion like this, there are so many who
are glad to look after her. Besides, you want me,"
he said, looking at her steadily, "and nothing else
counts beside that."
They walked to a hansom, and when they were
in and were driving through the sunshine, he asked
her a question.
"Have you wondered why I have never been to
see you?"
Very simply she answered him:
" Yes, I have wondered sometimes."
He was silent a moment, and then he said:
" Of course you have known that I have wanted to
come. There has not been one hour in all these
many days when I have not thought about you and



<pb n="313"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             313
hungered to see you. Patsy, I have been having a
hard struggle with myself!"
" About me ? " Patsy asked in a shy little voice.
"Yes, about you. There has been so much to
divide me from you, duties and difficulties-almost
insuperable difficulties."
Again he was silent, and after a pause he laughed:
" I am called a very unsociable person, and Carina,
my sister, gets furious with me at times. Over and
over again she has wanted me to do this, and that,
and the other, but I have always pleaded my work
as an excuse; and do you know what my work has
consisted of for the most part, at least when night
time has come? Just walking up and down outside
that big block of flats where you live, imagining
which room held you and what you were doing,
hoping that some spirit might perhaps whisper to you
that I was near."
" Alas! " said Patsy tremulously, "we live so high,
it is too far for a spirit to reach us. But it was
sweet of you," she said, with a little passion in her
voice, "and, oh, I do wish I had known that you
were there, then I should not have been so lonely."
He held out his hand suddenly, and she put hers
into it.
" My dearest," he said, " do you love me? "
She caught her breath.
"Oh, I do-I do," she said, and then she ques-
tioned him: "And you love me? "
But he did not answer her in words, only with his
eyes.
"Well, then, we love," he said, after they had
driven a little way, "and so the difficulties end and



<pb n="314"/>
314           A YOUNG MAN
begin at the same time, because if you love me you
will take my life just as it is. If I had not seen you
to-day, Patsy, I should have gone on treading the
path which I have set down for myself. You know
that these children are to me as my own children.
Perhaps your aunt may have told you that my sister
needs me at every turn. These are the things which
have kept me from you. It has seemed to me so
wrong, so unfair to approach you when I have all this
responsibility on my shoulders. Even now-- 
Patsy gripped his hand.
"Oh, don't say 'Even now!'"
"What shall I say?" he whispered, and catching 
her hand in both his he pressed it to his heart.
"There is so much to say I do not know how to :
begin."
And just because there was so much to say, they:
sat in silence after that till they came to the park,
and there he stopped the cab and they got out.
"Did you know I loved you?" he asked her, as 
they walked over the grass and under the trees. He
closed his hand round her slim arm; it was so delicate
and cool under the muslin sleeve.
As she shook her head with a vivid blush, he drew
her imperceptibly nearer. "Oh, yes, you did know-
-you must have known! Patsy, is it possible that:
you love me, dear, dear little Patsy? If only I might
hear you tell me this again."
She looked at him, and tried to look away.
"There is so little to tell," she said. "I was very
unhappy about you."
"Unhappy!"    He stopped and made her look
into his eyes. "Was I unkind?"



<pb n="315"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             3I5
'"Yes, once, and then the rest I imagined. It was
because you loved Meggy so much, and because I
fancied she reminded you of someone else."
He laughed.
"Now, that is odd, do you know, because over and
over again the child has reminded me of you."
They walked on slowly.
"You have the same lovely eyes and the same
pleading little face.  You will not be jealous of
Meggy any more, sweetheart?"
Patsy shook her head, and then with a glint of her
old mischievous self, said:
" Oh! well, perhaps I had better not make promises.
Where you are concerned, I believe I could be rather
silly, even nasty."
"Let us sit here on these two chairs," Sharpus said.
He took the glove from her hand and kissed that
little thin hand fervently. Then he sat and held it
in his.
" There can be, there must be no going back now,"
he said. "Still, dearest, you must look well before
you go too far."
He sketched his exact position; he left nothing
unsaid. Carina came before her like a living creature
as he depicted her.
"You think she will not like me? " Patsy queried,
as he paused.
He smiled.
" I am afraid she will hate you just at first, but that
we must do our best to alter. I have made many
sacrifices for Carina. Now is the time when I shall
exact a certain sacrifice from her. As I told you just
now, this and this alone has kept me away from you.



<pb n="316"/>
316           A YOUNG MAN 
But when I saw you to-day, Patsy, I felt I was doing
wrong. I followed you up to your seat, and was near
you all the time, watching you, studying you. Mrs.
Langridge had told me you were changed, but I was
not prepared for such a change.  My heart seemed
to meet your heart then, and duty, responsibility,
everything went down before love.  I have always
known I needed you, but it was only to-day that I
realised that you had absolute need of me."
Her little fingers clung to his.
"There will be no burden, no difficulty, if we can
be together, and oh, I do want you!"
Some sheep were browsing near; a little way off
a man was sleeping on the grass; in the distance,
children were running, people walking. The world
was moving very closely round and about them, but
they lost count of the world, and sat whispering till
long after the sun had commenced to sink.
They rose at last, and walked back to the flat. At
the door he left her, and when he had seen her
vanish into the shadows, he hailed a cab and was
driven to Mrs. Langridge's house.



<pb n="317"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             317
CHAPTER XXX.
SIR FRANCIS HEATHERINGTON was in his dressing-
room that same evening, dressing for dinner, when a
message was brought to him that Miss Prentice had
telephoned through asking if it would be possible
that he could go to her at once.
Dinner was a late function in Lady Amelia's house,
and his wife was writing some letters in her room
when Sir Francis tapped at the door and told her
briefly of the message he had received.
He had at first hesitated to tell her the truth, but
on second thoughts had decided to. do so.
" Evidently something is wrong," he said. "I think
I had better go."
And Lady Amelia at once agreed, adding, "Don't
hurry, Frank, we are doing nothing to-night, you
know, and dinner can very easily be postponed if
you like."
To this, however, he shook his head.
"Oh! I expect I shall be back again directly, I
don't suppose it's anything very, very important."
He went forward and kissed his wife, pressing his
hand affectionately on her shoulder. "Don't wait
on any account," he said.
As quickly as a hansom could take him he drove



<pb n="318"/>
318           A YOUNG MAN
to Kensington. He felt painfully excited; this un-
expected summons troubled him.
Patsy opened the door of the flat to him herself.
"Oh, Frank, how good of you to come," she ex-
claimed. " After I had telephoned to you I felt sorry
I had done it, I am afraid I must have upset you. I
do hope you weren't dining out or anything of that
sort."
"I should have come just the same," Heatherington
answered. Then he asked, "What is wrong?"
"I am a little frightened," the girl said. "I came
in rather late this afternoon and I found a woman
here. It seems that she came yesterday when I was
down at Winchbourne. Mead now tells me she had
the greatest difficulty in getting this woman to go
away yesterday. When she did go she said she
would come back to-day and she has kept her word.
She has been here since about five and simply refuses
to go."
"What sort of a woman?" inquired Heathening-
ton with a frown.                            :<
"A poor thing, common looking, half-starved. I
wanted to give her some money and I offered her;
something to eat, but she won't take anything: all
she wants is to see Sheila."
They were speaking in a low tone and Patsy led,
him dowri the narrow passage into the drawing-
room. As he turned up the electric light he saw
that she was pale and anxious.
"Where is Sheila?" he asked.
"At this moment I haven't the least idea. She
went away the day before yesterday with Jane for a
short motor trip."
i:W



<pb n="319"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             319
Patsy paused a moment and then she said:
"After all, perhaps, Frank, I ought not to have
sent for you."
" Of course you ought to have sent for me,"
Heatherington said a little sharply. "It is just in
this kind of thing that I can be of service. I sup-
pose she is some begging woman."
"I suppose so," Patsy said; "but she is so odd,
she has such a funny kind of defiant manner. When
I told her just now that my sister was away she said
she didn't believe me and she meant to stay here until
she had seen Sheila. I don't really know what to do
with her. I haven't the least idea, you see, when
Sheila will be back."
I think I shall know how to deal with this person,"
Heatherington said. "Where is she?"
" In the dining-room."
" Stay here," said Heatherington.
He went down the passage again and entered the
room where the woman was waiting. The light was
turned on, but she was sitting looking out of the
open window. Far below there was a glimpse of
the street and its ever moving traffic, and the glimmer
of lamps. Sir Francis began speaking immediately.
He took a very hard tone.
"I understand you insist on seeing Miss Prentice:
she is not here. Whatever you may have to say
must be written to her; it is abominable that you
should come here and frighten her sister."
"One does many abominable things when one is
starving," the woman answered.
Her voice was strained, there was a pronounced
cockney accent in it,



<pb n="320"/>
320           A YOUNG MAN
"What do you want with Miss Prentice ?" Heather
ington asked after a little pause.
"That's between me and her," was the answer.
"Well, I repeat, Miss Prentice is away. It is un-
certain when she will return. You can speak plain
to me. I am her trustee. I have the right to move
intimately in what concerns her; moreover, I believe
I know what has brought you here."
"Then if you do know you'll see as I've got a
good right to come," the woman said.
"You want money? You fancy you have some
hold over her and you mean to terrify her into paying
as she paid last autumn."
He turned on more light as he spoke and stood
looking sternly at the woman before him. She had
a miserable, a beaten look, yet she was young and
in a sense handsome. She stared at Heatherington
for a moment and then retorted:
"Whoever she gave money to last autumn, she
didn't give it to me, that's pretty sure. She's never
given me nothing, and yet it was me as she's got to
thank for getting her out of as nice a hole as any
woman would care to be in."
Heatherington caught his breath. He moved to
and fro and the woman sat down and watched him,
After awhile she spoke again:
"It was just by chance that I found out where she
was, and that she'd come into a bit. All the time
that she was down with her mother, I didn't go near
her, I didn't even write. I was that sorry for her.
It was good of me, and so you'd say if you had known
what I've gone through. But when I got to know
her mother was dead and she was up here going



<pb n="321"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            321
about as easy as anything, then I felt I'd got a right
to come to her: a right to ask her to keep me in
bread at least."
The man listening felt hemmed about by a sense
of dread and a miserable oppression. He let her
sit in silence for a long while and then he said:
"Possibly Miss Prentice may see her way to help-
ing you, or rather, acting on her behalf, I may see fit
to do what I can for you, but this would be absolutely
conditional."
"You mean you'd give me something now and
get me out of the place and give notice to the police
to look after me if I ever tried to come back."
"No;" said Heatherington, "not that sort of con-
dition. If you can prove to me that you have a
definite claim on Miss Prentice, you will see that I
shall know how to deal with that claim in a just and
proper manner."
The woman looked at him half sullenly.
" I don't know what you mean by harping on claim,"
she said. She paused abruptly, then she asked him
a question:
"Do you remember a case what was in the papers
nigh on two years ago? A case of a man passing
himself off as a foreign prince, living in swell hotels,
travelling round with his servant, getting money on
false pretences, never paying no bills?"
Heatherington shook his head.
"No."
His voice was almost inaudible as he asked her:
"What has that to do with this matter?"
She laughed.
"Everything. That man, who is now in prison,
21



<pb n="322"/>
322          A YOUNG MAN
doing his seven years, got mixed up with this Prentic
girl, and if I hadn't happened to come on the scene i
they'd have been off together. Oh! he meant to go ;:
straight with her. He was just mad about her. H
didn't often lose his head, but he lost it dead when
she come in his way. I found it all out just at the 
right moment. He was going to take her abroad
He could always get money if he wanted to, and he s
meant to shunt me somehow, I don't suppose he'd
have cared how! "
Heatherington sat down and leaned his elbow on !;
the table. He shadowed his face with his hand. He  !
was silent so long that the woman got fidgety. 
"'Tisn't many women would have done what I 
did," she said a little roughly, "and it wasn't all fo
myself neither. I was real sorry for her: she was
took in so completely, she had believed in him, youe
see; I suppose she thought she loved him. He isnt
a common man." There was even a touch of prid!et
in the woman's voice. "He was a gentleman boini
and it wasn't no wonder that she lost her heart 
him: he's that handsome he could do what he lik
with most women if he took the trouble; but a
told you just now, he never made a fool ofim
over any one of them until she came along. It
Tynland, the man as played at being his servant, W
put my husband on to the notion as her mother 
very rich and that there'd be a good bit of money
divide between them. Then when he saw which wat
the wind was blowing, Tynland got nasty, and just for
spite he let me know what was going on; it must havi'
been him who has been getting money out of her.'  j
There was a timid knock at the door and Pat'



<pb n="323"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            323
pushed it open, but Heatherington sprang to his
feet.
" I am coming, dear," he said very hurriedly; "it
is all right; it is nothing, a mistake. Wait for me
in the drawing-room, please."
As the door closed again he turned to the woman.
"If you will swear to me," he said a little unsteadily,
"that you did render Miss Prentice the service you
say you did, if you will swear to me that you stood
between her and the result of a most terrible mistake,
I will swear to you that you shall never want."
She got up and looked at him steadily.
"I am not telling you any lies," she said. " This
girl was still with her mother when Tynland let out
the truth, telling me as Harry, my husband, had
gone clean mad about her, was ready to do any-
thing for her, and it was Tynland as told me that
it was fixed that they was to meet in London, be
married somewheres and leave England right away.
He gave me everything to go upon, so when she
come she found me instead of Harry, and I tell you
fair I was as sorry for her that day as I have ever
been sorry for anyone! I didn't go to meet her
very pleasant, I can tell you; I was 'most ready
to kill her, for after all he belonged to me, and
he'd ought to have been good to me, but that's
my story and you don't want to know nothink. 
about that; but when I'd told her just where she
stood I couldn't hate her. You see she never so much
as dreamed he wasn't what he said he was. Of course
it wasn't in her to know how bold he could be. She'd
met him, it seems, in some town close to where she
lived. He called himself a Austrian prince and she
2I*



<pb n="324"/>
324            A YOUNG MAN
took him to be a prince. He lived like one, I bet."
The woman laughed bitterly. "Harry never was one
for doing things by halves, he'd got his horses and
his motor and all the rest; he played the game right
up to the end. I did all I could for her. When he
was taken a little while after and when his trial come ,;
on I kept her name out of it all, she wasn't never
mentioned even. It struck me then as being funny
that Tynland hadn't dragged her in, for it was he as 
gave the whole show away; but I see now what hei
was driving at: it was worth more to him to hold his
tongue about her and then squeeze her when he got
the chance."
She waited for Heatherington to speak, looking at rl
him curiously.
He stood staring down at the table, drumming his
fingers almost absently on it for a while, then bhe
put his hand into his waistcoat pocket, took out a
sovereign purse and counted out its contents on the 
table.
"This is all I have with me now," he said, "but I I
must see you to-morrow;" then he gave her hi ':
address, adding: "If you come early I shall bel
obliged. I will go thoroughly into the case and I
hope I shall be able to deal with you in a mann
which shall satisfy you. But to this there is a conditio
as I told you just now, and that condition is that ,if
I help you, if I do what I think is right for you, yo
will have to bind yourself not to approach Miss;
Prentice, not to come here again, and as far as you
can to protect her from others who may have som:t
knowledge of this story."                    ;
"There is no one as does know," she answered a 
: H J'K



<pb n="325"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            325
little eagerly. "There was only Tynland and Harry,
and Tynland is dead."
She picked up the gold and as she clinked it in
her hand she said a trifle sullenly, "I shouldn't have
come at all, but I've got to live somehow. I was in
'orsepital nearly all the .winter and I lost my berth.
I was in a bar, and I could earn a good bit one way
and another, but they don't want ill folk nor shabby
ones. This 'ull about start me again," she added,
then with a kind of pride she said: "I give you my
word I'll leave her alone; you can take my word.
I'm straight, and after what I've told you, you'll see
plain that if I wanted to be real nasty I had my
chance."
"I shall take your word," Sir Francis said, "but
you must let me help you all I can. I shall expect
you to-morrow."
Her face moved a little convulsively.
"It's like this," she said hoarsely, "I've got to live
and be on hand when Harry comes out. He's got
no one but me. There's lots belonging to him, big
people, but they've done with him long ago, before
he picked up with me that was, so I'm bound to stand
by him."
Sir Francis opened the door for her and let her
out of the flat himself. All the resentment and
defiance had gone out of her, she seemed humble
and nervous. - He felt overwhelmingly sorry for her.
As he closed the door he turned and saw Patsy
standing in the passage.
"It is getting very late, Frank," the girl said
nervously, "I have made you miss your dinner."
"I don't want any dinner," Heatherington said,



<pb n="326"/>
326            A YOUNG MAN
He followed her back into the drawing-room and
threw himself back into a chair.
Patsy looked at him in troubled fashion as he sat '
with his eyes closed.
"Can you tell me what that woman said?" shei
asked after a while.
He did not look at her as he answered: 
"If you insist I suppose I must."
"Of course I shall not insist, I only wished to know 
if I could be of some help."
"Well, there is nothing that you can do in this," 
Heatherington said curtly.
Patsy bent over a bowl of roses and winked away
some tears.                                      A
"Frank, I must tell you something. I have known , 
for a long time that Sheila has had some heavy
trouble. I saw a great difference in her when I came .g
back from Germany. It seemed to me that some- 
thing had come between us. Do all I could, I never X
was able to move this something, and now, though
we are together, it is as though we lived in different 
worlds."  Patsy paused. "I don't want to know: '
anything, I don't want to mix in her affairs, but IX
must know, Frank, dear, that Sheila is not going to I
be hurt in any way. I must do my share to help i:f:,
any help is needed." 
Heatherington still remained silent, then movedw i
by the knowledge that the girl was miserable he- 
roused himself. 
"I would rather not go into this intimately with 
you, Patsy, dear," he said gently, " just because Sheila
has kept this business to herself (and you are right,
there has been a trouble). I feel we must respect 



<pb n="327"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            327
her reticence as far as we possibly, can. I am not
sure it will be necessary to let her even know that
this woman has been here. You see," Heatherington
said, getting up and speaking as calmly as he could,
"my position in your lives gives me a certain
authority to move in what concerns you. It was a
great happiness to me to feel that your mother re-
posed so much trust in me, Patsy, and it is an even
greater happiness to be allowed to serve Sheila now,
perhaps to protect her."
Patsy stood waiting for him to say more.  His
words, his whole expression moved her deeply. He
seemed to have forgotten that she was so near as
he drifted into a spell of anxious thought, but all at
once he looked up again and as he saw her watching
him he smiled faintly.
"I have been going over everything in my mind,"
he said, "and I really do not think any good purpose
will be served by letting Sheila know what has
passed here to-night. It will be quite easy for me
to arrange things so that she is not likely to be
bothered in future. Let us make a compact, Patsy,
to say nothing of this to Sheila now or at any time."
Patsy bit her lip nervously.
"Is that quite fair to you, Frank?" she asked.
He smiled.
"Absolutely fair, and a great concession on your
part. You see some of us have just to patch together
our happiness out of certain little things, and when
I tell you that to move in this quietly, to be allowed
to take care of your sister even in this second-hand
sort of way is the most beautiful thing life can give
me now, I don't believe you will take that from me,"



<pb n="328"/>
328           A YOUNG MAN 
Patsy was crying, and he took her in his arms 
and kissed her.
"I hate to leave you here like this," he said, "I
wish you would come back with me, Patsy. It is
awfully lonely here and I am sure you will sit and 
fret when I am gone." But she shook her head.   ,
"I promise you I won't fret, because you see as |
you are going to take care of Sheila there will be 
nothing to fret about, and besides-- " she dried her 
tears and told him the story of what had happened 
that day, and whilst she was speaking the maid came:
in bearing a box of flowers.                  :
"Mr. Sharpus has just left these, miss; he asked 
me to say they come up from the country to-day 
and were picked by Miss Meggy, he thought you   l
would like to have them."                        i
Heatherington said many kind things and said
them tenderly, then he took a hasty leave of Patsy. 
"If I go now I may be able to catch him up," 
he said, "and I should like to see him." 
But Sharpus had disappeared, and as a matter of :
fact the other man made no effort to find ihim. He iX
threw his overcoat over his shoulder and walked 
down the many flights of stairs. The oppression 
had left him, he was aglow with a sudden kind of :
elation. Of late there had grown upon him a bitter-  :
ness, a critical condemnation of Sheila; he had in;
fact felt quite unable to understand the mental 
attitude -of the girl, both at the time of her mother's
death and afterwards. He had, of course, been con-
scious that there was always something mysterious
working in the background of Sheila's life, but, like
Patsy, he had been so impressed by the composure



<pb n="329"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             329
which had characterised Sheila's every action of late
that the knowledge of the existence of that secret
anxiety had ceased to hold him in the distressing
way it had done. He had at times practically for-
gotten it. And now it had been brought backl to
him and everything was so clear, so pitifully com-
prehensible.
He did not profess to understand what could have
led Sheila into such a hopeless-such a disastrous
tangle.  On the surface it was almost impossible to
ally the thought of a creature so fenced about with
personal pride, so imbued with a sense of social
dignity as Sheila undoubtedly was, with the picture
of a girl infatuated to the point of committing her-
self and her future into the hands of a man whom
she must have met by chance, and about whom she
could have known nothing save what this man himself
had told her. Unless he questioned further it was
probable Heatherington would never know the full
details of what had occurred, but despite this there
would always linger in his mind a sense of amaze-
ment that Sheila of all people in the world should
have permitted herself to fall a victim to a plausible
trickster.
It was not with, however, the story or its details
that Heatherington concerned himself, it was with
the results which had emanated from so terrible an
experience. He could hardly let himself imagine what
Sheila must have suffered, both at the time when
the truth had been forced upon her and afterwards.
Perhaps the afterwards had been the more awful of
the two; those months of silent misery lived under
her mother's roof, with her heart and her pride



<pb n="330"/>
330            A  YOUNG    MAN
seared, and every scrap of courage and wit which  '|
she possessed called to stand at constant tension 
ready to meet whatever might come! He thought 
that he had loved her to the full in the past, but he 
realised now that there were greater depths possible |:
to his love and he yearned over her in a way that 
was almost unnerving; and yet through, and with all
this there ran that curious note of gladness. He had  V X
spoken truly when he had said to Patsy that life could  X
hold nothing so beautiful to him now as to feel that
he possessed the power to protect Sheila; he hadi|
outlived any other kind of hope. Indeed he wanted  ^j
nothing more. He had been schooling himself all
this time to hear that she had chosen her future,
he was more or less prepared for her marriage, and 
to-night as he walked home through the hot streets 0
he found himself contemplating this with a tranquillity  j
which had come to him only within the hour. For 
after all, though it was certain she would marry, and 
might drift wholly out of his path, something would 
always be left to him henceforward in the realisation
that it had been granted to him to give her the
tenderest care, to stand unknown to her a guardian 
of all that was most precious in her life.
0   f ; i ':
i fft i '
0            A: 0:; 00:X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~f}f



<pb n="331"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.             331
CHAPTER XXXI.
MRS. LANGRIDGE swooped down on Patsy the day
following and carried her off.
Her aunt's delight in her engagement was almost
a surprise. She confessed to Patsy that. she had
kissed the young man when he had told her what
had happened.
"You know I lost my heart to him the first time
I saw him, and I have liked him a little bit more
each time I have seen him since. I think you are
both two lucky people. I feel as excited as if it were
my own engagement! "
In the cheeriest way possible Mrs. Langridge
defied all suggestions of difficulty, at least when she
was with Patsy.
When she was alone with Sharpus it was a little
different.
" Of course you know I am going to help you all
I can, but I am afraid I must warn you that it is
more than likely that there may be ructions with
Sheila. There is no earthly reason why she should
object, but in her present mood we must be prepared
to find her disagreeable,"



<pb n="332"/>
332            A YOUNG MAN
But Sharpus only smiled.
" I take it Miss Prentice is very practical," he said,
"and there are various things, you know, to which
a practical person might object, as I told you just now.
If I had not known this, if I had not felt that these
certain things might be regarded as definite barriers,
I should have spoken a long time ago."
"Barriers!" said  Mrs. Langridge. " Pooh! I
quite realise that your sister gives you a good deal
to do, but she is so young and so much run after
that I think we may safely count on her marrying
again one of these fine days, then perhaps you might
be free of the responsibility of the children. In any
case, if Patsy chooses to marry you, knowing that
you have these little creatures on your hands, that is
her business. However, I repeat we must be pre-
pared for a good deal of opposition from Sheila. I
am going to stand by you both on one condition,
however, and that is that Patsy remains with me till
you marry."
"There is nothing would please me better,"
Sharpus said.
Though he anticipated some protest, he was really
quite unprepared for the really aggressive attitude
Sheila assumed.
Patricia's sister flatly refused to recognise the
engagement. Her denunciation of the whole matter
was more than emphatic.
In her annoyance she even approached Sir Francis
Heatherington on the subject. She wrote and asked
him to call.
"As you have some right now to interfere in
things of this sort I want you to explain to Patsy



<pb n="333"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            333
that this cannot possibly go on, Frank," she said,
attacking the question the moment he came.
Sir Francis stood and looked out of the drawing-
room window.
"Where is Patsy? " he asked after a long pause.
Sheila shrugged her shoulders.
"With Aunt Judith, who, of course, sides with
her. Aunt Judith could scheme, and plot and suc-
ceed in marrying her own daughter well, but anyone
is good enough for us!"
Sir Francis frowned slightly.
"I don't call Sharpus ' anyone.' I think he is very
much 'someone.'"  After a little pause, he said:
"Frankly I don't quite follow you in your objection
to this marriage, Sheila."
"The man is a fraud in a sense," Sheila said irri-
tably. " You know yourself that he passed himself off
as a widower down in the country, or at least he
knew he was supposed to be a widower, and never
took steps to explain his real position. There were all
sorts of stories about him, and for my part I think
the explanation he has given about his sister and
these children is very odd, very odd indeed."
"I don't exactly see why you should be so down
on him," said Heatherington slowly; "as far as I can
remember he kept out of the village and bothered
no one. He certainly could not be held responsible
for silly gossip and lies. Honestly I find him an
awfully nice fellow. He is as clever as paint and
he has a certain amount of money. One thing is
very sure, he adores Patsy, so why not let-them be
happy? God knows there's precious little happiness
knocking about these times!"



<pb n="334"/>
334           A YOUNG MAN
"It was absurd of me to suppose you would help :
me. Of course you are with them and against met"
Sheila had turned very white.  She was arrang
ing a number of exquisite flowers in little vases.
Heatherington moved round and looked at her:
steadily. He had coloured hotly and some words
trembled on his lips, but they were not spoken. He
waited awhile watching her and then he said quietly:
"If it is any satisfaction to you to know this, I may
as well tell you that I have already gone thoroughly
into everything connected with Sharpus, and if Patsy 
were my own sister I should be glad and proud to
know she was the wife of such a man."
"Very well then, that ends it, I suppose!" Sheila
said with a bitter laugh. "Let them marry and let 
her turn into a nurse-housekeeper as soon as she 
likes. If my mother-  "
"Don't," said Heatherington, a little unsteadily,;
"don't bring in your mother. I know this is what i;
you have done with Patsy already and I am awfully 
sorry about it. You have only upset the child need-  I
lessly."
"It seems to me I can do nothing right," Sheilat
said, and in her passion she threw down the orchids Ad
she held in her hand, then she calmed 'herself: "IJ  i
was bound to make a protest. I think Patsy is:
making a great mistake. Mr. Sharpus may be aMll  i
you say he is, but that will not whitewash his sister. ;
She is wholly impossible and objectionable; a great ,
singer if you like, but in every other way most un-;
desirable."
"It is so easy to throw stones," Heatherington  :
said-his tone was perfectly even-"let us be chari-t 



<pb n="335"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            335
table. We know nothing of Mrs. Dalesmere's trials.
Her brother gave me just the outline of her story;
he did not spare her, but he was very sure that she had
not had a fair chance in her married life. She made
a great mistake in marrying as she did and when
she did, but, good Lord! if we were all to be called
to account for our mistakes we should be in a pretty
bad way some of us."
There was a pause-a pause pregnant with signi-
ficance-then Sheila said:
"I don't want Patsy to marry and leave me."
The tremble in her voice made his heart vibrate.
"Why that is natural enough," he answered; " but
why should you lose her even though she should
marry?"
" Patsy is all I have," Sheila said in a dull way.
"I never knew how much she was to me till now
when she is not here. I think it cruel of Aunt Judith
to have taken her away when I knew nothing about
it-and I hate this man Anthony Sharpus."
The petulance in the words made the other man
smile involuntarily.
"All this means that you really care for the child
and that being so you-"
"No," said Sheila decisively and reverting to her
usual cold hard manner, "let her marry him if she
will. I will never say that I think it a good thing,
because I don't, and I never shall. I am sorry to
have bothered you, Frank. I thought you might
have gone with me in this, but I see I have been
mistaken."
"Oh! it is no bother. I am only sorry we can't
agree."



<pb n="336"/>
336            A  YOUNG MAN
He turned round from the window, took up his
hat and stick and then paused to admire the orchids.
"You are a regular conservatory here, Sheila," he
said.
"I wish people would not send so many flowers;
there is really no room for them. Patsy is right in
one thing, this flat is too ridiculously small for any-
thing. Will you have a gardenia, Frank?"
"Thanks," he put down his hat and slipped the
blossom in the buttonhole of his coat.
He should have gone, but he lingered. Sheila's
hands had always fascinated him. He watched her
now in magnetised fashion as she filled the innumer-
able little glasses with the rare blooms. Like her
hands her whole body conveyed a note of exquisite-
ness. She had discarded her black and was wearing
a gown of delicate mauve. She had the look of an
orchid herself. His presence, his silence troubled
Sheila just a little.
"What are your plans?" she asked, to make con- 
versation. "Are you going abroad?"
He said "Yes," adding: "I want to take Amy to 
Switzerland; she is not a bit well, she has been 
coughing a good deal all this spring."
"I am sorry," Sheila said in her even way. "Please 
tell her I shall come and see her before she goes." 
"I think she would like to see you," he answered; A
then he said a little unsteadily: "These flowers smell 
a little too strongly for this room, Sheila, I am not e
sure that I care about orchids and gardenias." 
There came back to his memory in that moment ?
the recollection of the last time he had been in the ;;
flat and how Patsy's anxious look and tear-stained 
:''!'^:



<pb n="337"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             337
eyes had brightened as she 'had been given that box
of homely flowers from the farm.
" They are so grand," he said; " not a bit natural."
Sheila laughed. "Why of course not. I forget how
much this orchid costs," she took up one as she
spoke.
"That's the mistake," said Heatherington. "God
never meant flowers to cost anything."
And Sheila laughed again.
"You are so comically out of date sometimes,
Frank."
She wished he would go. He had vexed her sharply
because he had refused to go with her, and she had
thought that her power would have been sufficient
to have moved him any way; and then again she
was at war irrevocably with all that he embodied-
those things which she held to be so foolish.
"You are just as sentimental as Patsy," she said.
"God bless her," said Heatherington: "may she
keep her sentiment all her life! "
He held out his hand.
"I must be off." As his strong fingers closed over
Sheila's delicate ones, he said: "I am going to ask
you a favour, the first and the last. Be good to
Patsy now; you have just said that she is all you
have, well, be good to her! For I tell you, Sheila,
she loves you, and her heart is aching for your sym-
pathy in this business."
"I am sorry," Sheila Prentice said, as she took
her hand from his, "but I can't make a promise I
know I shan't keep. If Patsy marries this man she
must lose me; she can't have us both."
Heatherington went away after that, and when he
22



<pb n="338"/>
338           A YOUNG MAN
was outside the door, he took the gardenia from , 7
his buttonhole and deliberately set his foot upon it2
That night he asked his wife how soon she could
be ready to start for St. Moritz.
"I want to get you out of this stuffy atmosphere," 
he said; "you want bracing up."
"I am really all right," Lady Amelia answered,
her thin face flushing, as it always did when he spoke 
to her in that tone.
"No; you are not all right," Heatherington A
answered. "I see now it hasn't done you a bit of^3
good coming to town; it was horribly selfish of me
to bring you." 
The flush died out of her cheeks and she looked 
at him with a mist in her tired, pathetic eyes.
"Frank, dear, there is really nothing the matter;: 
you mustn't fuss about me."
"Oh! but I must," he answered her almost roughly,
and he went up to her and took her in his arms.
"Don't you understand? " he said, " I want to have
this in my life. I want to take care of you, I want:
to make you know that you are valuable to me,
Amy, for somehow I have a sort of idea that you)
have been thinking things which have hurt you, a
I want you to put those things out of your mind
once and for all. Can't you do this much for me?
"Yes; I can do this much," Amelia Heathering-
ton said; "and more than this to give you pleasur
Frank." She took his hand and held it to her fa
and as she moved away she said: " But we must corn
back when Patsy is married."
"Rather! " Heatherington answered; "but
know they have settled that they won't have tll



<pb n="339"/>
FROM   THE COUNTRY.            339
wedding till the autumn, and I think they are right;
a good many things may happen between this and
then to make things smoother."
He went round to see Patsy the next day, to tell
her that he was leaving town that night.
" You'll keep me going with all the news," he said;
"and look here, Patsy, buck up, there's a dear! Sheila
will come round. Everything else is going splendidly,
isn't it ?"
She nodded her head and smiled for a moment.
" Carina and I have made friends; you see she is
having such a good time I don't think she wants Tony
as much as she did. Anyhow she hasn't bothered
him one little bit. He quite expected that she would
be furious when he told her about me, but she took
it really quite quietly."
"And the children? " asked Heatherington.
"Meggy is making up her mind," Patsy said
seriously, though her'eyes twinkled. "I went down
yesterday and spent the day at the farm, and Aunt
Judith and I are going to stay there a few weeks. As
soon as I have convinced the child that I am not
going to take Tony away from her I think it will be
all right."
As a matter of fact Mrs. Langridge fell so in love
with the farmhouse in the country that she changed
all her plans.
'"I have been drinking abominable waters abroad
for more autumns than I care to count," she informed
the two young people whom she had taken under her
wing, " and now I am going to try the effect of a home-
made cure. I am going to get up with the dawn, pick
my own fruit for breakfast, and grow beautiful and



<pb n="340"/>
340           A YOUNG MAN
good. Patsy, why have I never known the country 
could be so delightful before? I intend to have  x six 
or seven weeks of forgetfulness-weeks in which '-)
nothing will happen and nothing will matter."  :i
"Oh! Things can happen in the country just as"
they can happen in town, can't they, Meggy ?" Patsy
answered to this. 
The child pondered a moment and then said: 
"Things happen all the time-sometimes really 
live things you know and sometimes only things that ;
we get in dreams." 
She spoke meditatively. She was engaged ;i 
writing a letter to Lawrence Goodborough.
Patsy had remarked that lately Mr. Goodborough X
had been sending a good many remembrances down 
to the farm. His last present was a little watc
which Meggy had suspended round her neck at that
moment.
"Shall I tell you what I think? " Patsy said wheW
this letter had been read by Sharpus and herself, ani
Meggy had gone with the nurse down to the
to post it herself. "I believe Lawrence Goodborotl
is not really unhappy about Sheila."
"Shall I tell you what 1 think? " answered 
as he put his arm through hers and drew he
the garden. "Lawrence had only a kind of
tion for Sheila. I used to think, not so very longla
that he was rather fond of Carina, and now!
sure of it."
"Tony!" Patsy flushed with excitement;
that would be lovely, he is so nice and he
take such care of her. I am sure he would
her happy."



<pb n="341"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.             341
"I am   sure he would do his best," Sharpus
answered; "but we shall see what we shall see. I
happen to know, however, that when Carina goes
to Canada and then on through the States, as she has
just booked to do, Lawrence Goodborough will be
seized with a desire to travel in that direction also!"
They strolled through the old garden and out into
the field, and there after awhile little Meggy found
them. She had brought back some letters from the
village. There was another package for herself, and
she sat down on the rough grass and began to undo
this.
"Do open that nice grey letter first," she said to
Patsy; "I mean the one that smells so lovely. I am
sure that must be a beautiful letter."
Patsy's face flushed. "From Sheila!" she said.
"At last she has written! At last!"  She moved
apart a little to read what Sheila had to say, and when
the latest of Mr. Goodborough's presents had been
unpacked and admired, and Tony and the child came
over to her, she put the letter into his hands and he
saw that she was very, very pale.
"Sheila is married," she said, "and I must write
to her. I will come back to you again, dearest."
He let her go, then he followed her and kissed her
softly, and then he said:
"All right, don't be long; Meggy and I will wait
for you here."
But the letter Patsy wrote was not to her sister;
it was to the man who loved her sister with such an
anxious, such an unselfish love.
Heatherington received that letter two days later.
Patsy had worded it as tenderly as possible.



<pb n="342"/>
342           A YOUNG MAN
"I know it must hurt him, but perhaps it won't be 
so bad, coming from me."
In her letter she wrote: "I don't know why 
Sheila has not told me anything, for now, look- i
ing back, I am   sure this must have been in 
her mind all this summer. I knew, of course, that
Mr. Iscariot admired her immensely; he was always
sending his motor car and his orchids and all sorts of
other things, but I never imagined that she could
have given him a second thought. He is such a,
horrid man, so common, so ugly, just everything that 
Sheila has always hated. I suppose it is because he
is so very, very rich, but even then it is incompre-;
hensible to me! Dear Frank, I feel so sad about
this! Was I wrong to leave her? Should I have
been able to have prevented this? She tells me that' i
she will be away for months. I am afraid that means 
that poor Jane will have been forgotten. I am writ-
ing now to tell her to come down here, and when you
come back, I want you to help me to make someo
arrangement by which Jane can have a littli
independence. She shall have that furniture y
bought for me and make a home for herself some
where, and I will see her as often as I can. Whe.  
you have time, Frank, dear, do write to me."  S;
Patsy was a long time going back to the fiel
The child and the man sat where she had left tii
watching for the first glimpse of her white-rob
figure through the trees in the garden.
Meggy had folded up the parcel-it held a
and Sharpus had put a new penny into it. H 
given her her choice of an old shilling and a !
penny, and, of course, she had taken the penny. 
*  ; '  -  A .  ; ' »



<pb n="343"/>
FROM    THE COUNTRY.            343
She chattered away for a little while, but then she
grew pensive.
" Why doesn't she come ?" she asked restlessly, and
all at once she got up.
"I see her! Hold that, Tony, don't let it drop,
and sit there till I come back. You won't move, will
you?"
He sat as he was ordered, arid watched the little
figure in the blue linen overall run over the grass
to meet the slim tall figure in the white gown.
Meggy paused a moment and frowned to herself
when she was quite close to Patsy; she saw the
stain of tears round Patsy's eyes and this was a pain
to her.
She stretched out her little arms.
" What's the matter, darling? " she asked tenderly;
"has anybody been doing anything nasty to you?
Oh! lovey, I don't want you to cry!"
Patsy stooped to kiss her and then knelt on the
grass, and the child cuddled her in a tight embrace.
" You shan't be made mislerble," she said. " Tony
'dores you and I love you, and all the rest of the
things in the world don't mean nothing, do they, when
you've got us ?"
THE END.
Printed by The Chapel River Press, Kingston, Surrey.



