BOOK IELFIE AND HER PARENTSCHAPTER IIN WHICH OUR HEROINE MAKES A GRIEVOUS ONSLAUGHTON A CODFISHIHE story begins with a little girl and a codfish.	Any reader who is not interested in little girls and codfish may skip this first chapter and pass on, for the matter contained therein has really very little bearing on the story itself, and nothing whatever to do with the plot-that is if a plot can be discovered later on by a reader possessing more than ordinary imagination. The incident, indeed, about to be related only serves to show that a little girl, however free from feminine vanity, may be wounded to the heart's core by comments (not flattering) on her personal appearance if such comments are passed by one whom she adores and whom she herself thinks perfect. And in those clays Flue Charriiigton did think Brian I nglehv was perfect.	Down at the end ol Brewers Lane, that little narrow, quaint street which is sandwiched between the Green and the noisy, hustling main thoroughfare of Richmond-onThames, a little girl stood one wet evening in January some few years ago and gazed with absorbed attention into a ridiculous slip of a shop that called itself a fishmonger's and e hieh was owned by one, Mr. Dobbs.To the casual passer-by there was nothing whatever on-'Iii. Dobbs's sloping, fishy, marble slab this dismal evening leulated to excite the faintest interest. Indeed, the few	Irrying, well-to-do pedestrians who chiefly used Brewers I.e ne as a short cut to the Green and its old-fashioned, sub-	t;tntiaJ houses, and who were themselves accustomed to deal :0 expensive fish shops up thin JTiII---sh:op. overlion I11 with10	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEhandsome turbot, soles, salmon, and lobsters-all enticingly set forth amidst lumps of white, shiny ice and green fern fronds, dismissed it with one brief and almost disdainful glance.	But to the little girl, a large cod, a thinnish hake and, an undersized haddock-which lay in a row on the slab and separated from one another at as great a distance as the limitations of the slab permitted in order to make them look more--flanked north and south by a bunch of bloaters and sonic Pale-coloured shrimps, and east and west by a box of kippers and some sandy cockles, seemed to be the objects of extraordinary and absorbing interest.	With hands clasped, she stood and stared at them, apprently oblivious to the fact that the rain was running down her mushroom-shaped hat on to her curly hair and percolating through the bushy masses to her thin little white neck, ''1 wonder," she murmured, "if one of those three is it."	This ambiguous remark was not addressed to Mr. Dobbs, who, seeing that business was slack, had retired to the parlour at the back of the shop for a comforting cup of tea with \lr:'. Dobbs, but in a half whisper to herself; whilst with a curious little movement, half entreating and half condemnatory, Ate held out a small, shabbily gloved hand to the three fish, addtug in a louder voice "If it is, I hope-oh, I hope it isn't the biggest, for then-I couldn't bear it."	'Yes, Miss Elfie 1' Mr. Dobbs silently and suddenly filled the narrow door-way. He was a very large, egg-shaped man. He never saw his own feet and legs save in the long mirrors of shop windows; and Mrs. Dobbs said, without meaning to be unkind (for she was very fond of Mr. Dobbs) and more with the intention of cheering him up than anything else, that this did not matter, his lower limbs being the least attractive part of his person. "They're like the legs and feet of the elephant jumbo I once rode on at the Zoo--very substantial-like. Was they to serve as pillars instead ofSamson himself couldn't have pulled then) down."	Elfle started. She had not heard his approach, for, alter the manner of large, heavy creatures, Mr. Dobbs moved slowly and soundlessly. "Oh-er, good evening, Mr. Dobbs. I hope I am not interrupting you at your tea." She was conversant with Mr. Dobbs's habits; also a large crumb of bread and butter had adhered to the lowest of his several chins.	"Not at all, Miss Elfie. I've finished. And if 1 hadn't, I'm always ready to serve you." Mr. Dobbs spoke in gallant fashion. He and the little girl were old and tried friends, for Elfie had been shopping for her family almost since she'd been able to walk. "And," lie continued, "what can I do for you tonight ?"FiRe hesitated Mr. Dobbs -au- that her small face woreAN UNDRESSNI) HEROINE	Sii xprcss1on of anxiety, and his large heart became soft. In knew that the Charrington family was not rich-he new, in tact, that it was poor, that Mrs. Charringtun was xtravagant and a poor manager, and the Major-God bless jim, for a finer gentleman never breathed-was inclined,wing to the inclemency of the British climate and conseInent depression of spirit, to visit the ''Spiders'' round the corner a little too frequently; so, because of his soft heart, lie was in the habit of reducing his prices to Elfie. He instantly decided to reduce them now.Fish is cheap today, Miss Elfie, especially cod."	"Oh "-the little girl started violently--you have a codlish ... I was just wondering.''	"Of course 1 have a codfish. Just one left. 1 was reserving it especially for you. A beauty, too Fresh as a daisy.	Mr. Dobbs with a slow, elephantine movement leaned towards the slab and the three fish, and, seizing with his thumb and forefinger the largest beneath its gills, held it up for inspection. "There, what do you think of that ? Ain't he a fine fellow ?"	To Mr. Dobbs's surprise there was no response, and, looking down, he saw that the little girl's eyes were tightly shut.	Thinking she might have eaten something that had disagreed with her and had been seized with a sudden spasm of pain, he waited, Mr. Dobbs was never in a hurry. He stared reflectively at a sickly gas jet which but partly illuminated his shop, and vaguely wondered whether the Richmond Gas Company just round the corner was responsible for the poor light, or the burner.	Then Elfie spoke in a sort of strangled whisper: "Are you quite sure, Mr. Dobbs ?''''Sure I"'Sore that it is a codfish P'	\lr. Dobbs gazed at her, at her closed eyelids which were Hind together as though she never meant to open them n'ain, at her small person which had become strangely droop-	ng and dejected. He scratched his lowest chin, thereby r'moving the large crumb, and wished that females were	less complex. "If it's not s codfish I'll eat it whole," he said hl iefly.Elfie opened her eyes. "Oh, I don't want you to do that,"-en said hurriedly. "I was only hoping you might have made mistake, that you had got mixed, and that thin fish there"--lie pointed to the hake-"might have been a cod and nottins." As with an effort, she bent her gaze upon the large jsh still dangling from Mr. Dobbs's hand, "It-it is so ly-so dreadfully ugly. I mean its mouth-it's terrible.lsit't it P''But its looks a ujit ;iliect its taste, Miss ijihe, lie anhumouring lieu. Hid always thought her a strange, fancil Ilittle girl, but this was more than fanciful : it was, to putplainly, stupid. But perhaps she was tired. She was suel an alive, such an alert little girl, so full of activity. "Pawn' the shop of a morning on her way to school like a streak iii lightning," he would remark to Mrs. Dobbs ; "before I cnn breathe twice she's flashed round the corner of the Lane."	"If we only ate what was pretty, we should never touch a bit of pig, or bullock, or-well, codfish. Now shall I weigh it for you ?" He moved towards some scales.	Elfie started. "Oh no, thank you. I don't want to buy it-at least, not tonight." She gave a faint shiver."It won't keep.""I-i mean some other time I ought want to buy 0th,though 1 don't think I ever shall, but one never knows what Father and Mother might want; but not tonight-certainly not tonight."	"May I ask, then, why ..?" Mr. Dobbs paused. He wanted to put it delicately. He was not in the least annoyed at having been unable to effect a sale, but he was filled with curiosity. Why should a little girl on a night so unattractive -it was now raining hard and Elfic's curls were dripping with water -come and make inquiries about a fish she'd no intention of buying ? Of course, feminine things had queer	ways . 	Thoughtfully Mr. Dobbs returned the cod tothe slab and carelessly, for it now lay with its head on thehake's shoulder, its eyes staring in oblique fashion at thebox of kippers.	"Why then," said Elfie, "have I come just to look at itI'll tell you, though it will hurt, hurt dreadfully . . . but I can't stare at it while I talk. I-" She turned her back on the codfish, and Mr. Dobbs had to lean forth from his shop door-she had refused to enter-to catch what she said.	"But first of all, before I tell you, didn't you once say I reminded you of your little girl who-died ?" Elfie's voice dropped. "Your little Nell ?"	"Certain sure I did," replied Mr. Dobbs heartily. He was now on surer ground, knew where he was, so to speak. "I've often said it, too, to Mrs. Dobbs; the very spit of her: hair, eyes, nose-thin-not like me." Mr. Dobbs surveyed his vast proportions mournfully. "Thin, thin as akipper-"	"And her mouth," interrupted Elfie, "You've left out her mouth. What was that like 1¡' Anxiously she looked up at him.	"Her mouth ?"-Mr. Dobbs dropped his voice and became poetical-' 'was a pink rosebud. One of those little buds you'llA N U N I) N U S S U 1) II U Its_c untoluing itseti ii the snnshore on juite InoriltIth.'. &,Ittot those little buds that smells like a hit el heaven one ofthose little buds the colour of the inside of a shell." Mr. I)obhs's hands were clasped across his middle One of those little buds like-like---"And not like a codfish's ?'' Elfie suddenly cued.'A codfish's!" Mr. Dobbs stopped in shocked astonishment.	'Your little Nell's mouth was not like the mouth of that fish ?' Elfie swept round, pointing a finger of scorn at the poor dead cod. "It did not stretch from ear to ear, did itlike that ? It was not the ugliest arid most terrible mouth in the world ? Because-if it was, it is far better that she, your little Nell, should be dead and buried deep in the ground." Elfie's voice broke, she could say no more She was wrestling with her tears.	Then illumination came to Mr. Dobbs. He understood, and a wave of hot indignation surged through his usually sluish veins.'Why, who said it ?" he cried.	Brian, my friend Brian Ingleby, who 1 thought loved me a little. He said it this afternoon we had quarrelledonly a little quarrel, and	She was clasping and unclasping her hands, digging her nails into her thin little palms, struggling not to cry-she who never cried. "Do you ... do you think he was right, Mr. Dobbs ? Do you think my mouth is like a cod's P I will try to bear it."	For a moment Mr. Dobbs paused while he pulled himself together. He loved the little girl, they were real friends, lie would not have hurt her for the world, but now that he tame to examine the feature in question he saw that it was large and did not in the least resemble a pink rosebud. But not being a judge of feminine beauty, he also failed to see that, in spite of its largeness, it was extraordinarily attractive. Where before had he ever met a mouth with such curving lines, such strength, such sweetness, such pathos, such whimsicality, and, above all, with so much character-if he'd had eyes to see ? It was a mouth that in the years to come artists wanted to paint, and men, the nicest sort of men, wanted to kiss.	A bright thought came to Mr. Dobbs. He was an honest man; he could not tell a lie. He could not say the little	I's mouth was a pink rosebud like 'his little Nell's had been, but he could say something comforting and stimulating. "People don't love us for what we look like, and ''andsome is as 'andsome does'-" he broke off in consternation, for with a cry which was full of bitterness EWe suddenly swoopcd down upon the cod, sewed it, and, with all hut14	AN UNnEassEn HEROINEchildish strength, [lung it through the gloom and rain on to the Green, where it alighted plump on to the top of an elderly gentleman's silk hat, which it removed with violence, and together they bounced to the ground. Then Elde, in a perfect hurricane of weeping, disappeared into the darknessill	S"Ile barged heavily into the elderly gentleman, who, his back to Brewers Lane, was stoopingly engaged in examining the fish which had so amazingly removed his hat. It lay there, muddy and dishevelled-no longer could Mr. Dobbs have likened it to a "fresh daisy"-its bulging eyes seeming to stare with a sinister and at the same time a jocular expression at the wet, depressed top-hat that lay at its side.	This sudden onslaught from Elfie (it felt to the elderly gentleman as though another heavy fish with bomb-like activity had leapt on to him from the rear) was the last straw, and he turned round savagely."Elfie F' he ejaculated, astonished.	'Oh !" she cried, but more from pain, for the impact had hurt her-Mr. Doyle, the elderly gentleman, being a bony man.	"Couldn't you see where you were going ?" He tried to moderate his anger. Elfle and her parents were his nextdoor neighbours at Wistaria Terrace on the river. He lived at Number Two, and they at Number One.	'No," she replied. She didn't explain that her eyes were blinded with tears and rain. "And--[ didn't expect to find you kneeling here.""Kneeling here!" He spiuttereil with temper. "I don'tleant to kneel here, but-I was looking for my hat. My hathas just been removed from my head with extreme violence by a-fish. That fish." He kicked the cod with his toe.	'How it got here I cannot imagine. It is the most amazing thing that has ever happened to me in my life-a life which has not been uneventful. The fish suddenly shot threu,i1i space, apparently 1mm nowhere it was like a projectile from a gun and-not a creature to he seen anywhere but you. You, I suppose. can offer no explanation''-Mr. Doyle, who had now recovered his hat, was brushing the nap the right woe against the sleeve of his coat-''of the mystery 1''Yes,'' said Elfin, "I can, for I threw it.""You threw it I" Mr. Doyle stopped brushing his lar.She nodded.Mr. Dnyle was ten overcome for a moment to do anythingut loll hi': breath, Then, reoverine ''Hilt why P'AN iixnness;n	1LRO1NI	15'I was annoyed with it.''	''Annoyed with it ?'' He didn't want to echo her words for he plumed himself on his originality of thought, speech, and action, but amazement bereft him of his customary wits,"Yes," she said."Kindly explain.""I cannot, but-I'm sorry."	"It's no good being sorry." His anger was returning. "It was a most wrong, a most wicked thing to do.""I know," she said."And what are you going to do now 1"I'm going home."'And you're going to leave that fish lying there ?""Yes. It's no use to anybody."	Mr. Doyle placed his top-hat on his head with a movement expressive of having done with her. Her action had been abominable, her attitude in the matter was even worse. He'd no little girls of his own, for he was unmarried, but had he been the father of one who wantonly hurled fish at unsuspecting pedestrians on Richmond Green he tould have seen to it that she was well birched and put to bed.	"Good evening," he said grimly, "and I hope another time-" But Elfie was not listening to him. By the light of the few flickering gas lamps she discerned a figure, to her a beloved figure in spite of its wavering, stumbling gait, emerging from the corner of Paved Court, and, like an arrow from a bow, she was after it. It was her father returning from the "Spiders", returning, as he sometimes (lid, with a hazy head, uncertain feet, and already gathering shame at his heart, a shame which on the morrow would be intensified a thousand times. She forgot Mr. Doyle and the codfish and her ungoverned action. She only knew that her father, her own darling father, was there in front of her suffering from what had long been known in the family as "another giddy attack"-which attacks were the result of a sunstroke in India-and that he needed her help.	"Father, dear." She slipped a small, wet, but helpful nand through his arm, and at once the devious footsteps became straighter. "We'll go home together. Isn't it wetAnd you've no umbrella.'' There was a pitying, almost a	maternal quality in Elfie's voice.	"No, Elfie, and-I've got 	The major paused; hefeared he might speak incoherently; and he made a greateffort to steady his voice.	"A giddy attack," she finished quickly. "I know. I-I can see. Don't talk. I'll look after you. Lean on me, and we'll sem he uinew'.'' The we' v:nhlcine down Friar's10	AN	ONORR5SED HEROINELane to the river. \Vistaria Terrace was at the end, not three minutes away, but there was a flight of steps to be negotiated which led up to the Terrace. Map Pr Cliarrington was not good at steps when suffering from his giddy attacks," and Elfic's already tired little heart sank as they stood at the toot of them; but there was no trace of despondency in her manner as she said : ''Now, Father, hold the railing on one side and lean on me n the other.''	Half way up-and their progress was slow-Mr. Doyle overtook them, and passed on without a word. He made no offer to help the little girl . . . . The father was a disgusting beast, and Elfic had flung a codfish at his (Mr. Doyle's) head! The Charrington family, on the whole, was one to be avoided He'd always said so to his sister, Miss Doyle, who kept house for him, and to his nephew, Humphry (who disagreed with him and who adored Elfic), and he was more than ever of that opinion tonight. With scrupulous care, to avoid scratclno.t some recently new and very ugly brown paint, lie inserted hs latch-key in the lock of his door and passed in to his chilly, dull, and entirely selfish home, congratulating himself that hr was not as other men were, and closed the door firmly behind him.	Five minutes later, a little breathless, for Major Charringtoi NN-as a big and heavy man, Elfic piloted her father along thenarrow flagged garden-path-and how anxious she was thathe should not tread upon the flower-bed, a long thin strip of a bed which flanked the path oil one side and which contained some precious bulbs-to their own front door, braced him up against an iron railing, about which great thick branches of an ancient wistaria twined, whilst she searched his pockets for the latch-key, and finally, after getting the door open, she conducted him along the passage to a small sitting-room behind the dining-room, put him on to a couch, unlaced his wet boots, covered him up with an old striped knitted sofa blanket, kissed him lightly on the top of his head, and then went in search of her mother. And Elfie Charrington at this time had reached the mature age of nine years.TV	Mrs. Charrington was in bed. Beyond a slight headache there was nothing particularly the matter with her, bnt it was her habit to retire to her bed when she was bored and the evenings were long and (lull, and the rain which always depressed her after years spent in "dear sunny India" beat against the window-panes of the drawing-room, and the Major was likely to return-as he invariably did on dismal eveningsAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	17and when she 'o as in an unusually unhappy mood-with oneol his 'giddy attacks'', arid would need a certain amount of all ention. This attention Elfie could dye. She was devot':tt to icr father, and was so capable for her years. ''She mane ':s him better than 1,'' Mrs. Charrington had said to Brid,-ct, tile oae and only maid-of-all-work, who 1111(1 lived with the family lot years, and who knew all about the Major's failing and by way of reply Bridget had sniffed. Bridget 1111(1 been summoned all the way front the basenment kitchen, forty-four stairs below-the, houses of Wistaria Terrace were old and tail and Georgian, and, along with many quaint and charming characteristics, were inconvenient and difficult to work owing to their height-just to bring her mistress a hot-water bottle. "When site might have waited till I brought her supper I could have slung it on my arm, but site's that selfish...'' Bridget smiled again indignantly. ''And putting everything on to Miss Elfie.' ' She slapped the extremely lint water bottle against the soles (it Mrs. Cliarrington 's feet, hoping that that lady might sustain a slight burn before site was quick enough to remove them.	"Yes," she said, "Miss Elfie can manage him because she loves him. It's wonderful what love can do, and-here is Miss Elfie herself, the darlint.'' All this in Bridget's best and broadest Irish, impossible to transcribe (save ''the darlint''), and she flounced from the room as the child entered.	Elfie stood and surveyed her mother. ''Are you ill ?'' she asked.	''Only one 01 my sick headaches, darling." Mrs. Charriogton always called her child ''darling'' and Bide accepted the endearing expression for what it was worth. \'tith childish intuition, she'd long ago discovered that her mother did not in the least regard her as a darling, but as somewhat of a nuisance.	"Ought you, then, to be reading P Bide sat down on the side of the bed, and Mrs. Cbarrington wished she wouldn't, 115 her frock and coat were wet through."It helps me to forget my trouble.""What trouble ?"	"Your father has--Mrs. Charrington coughed slightly'another giddy attack P"Yes."'aeelng him-knowing even that he is poorly, alwaysat:, me-it hurts me, Elfie.''l3ot you do nothing for him.''	Mrs. Charrington started. Elfie had never spoken like this before.	'When Father's poorly I feel as if a knife was sticking into ray heart,'' prorootneud the eltihil ('El a'stly.58	A N	U N	N	s S i: n	it I ,Mrs. Charrington shuflcd'Where is he, darling F'"In the study.""Where did you meet him ?"¥ 'I saw him on the Green. I'd been out with Brian.''	'Till this time, Elfie You know I don't like your being about the streets at so late an hour." Mrs. Charrington spoke with plaintive irritation. She sat up, with her elbow against the pillows, and, in spite of her irritation, viewed with complacency the reflection (in one of the long wing mirrors of her dressing-table) of her shapely arm ; its rounded whiteness revealed by the falling back of the much be-frilled and sonicwhat torn sleeve of her night-dress."I'd nothing to do after school. 1 met him on Hill The',and he asked me to go to the Pen Ponds with him ; it want'raining then." Elfie took off her hat and shook the water from it,"Vou're far too fond of boys. Little girls, I wouldn't	''I'm not fond of him today,' flashed Elfle. ''I hate inn. He's a rude, nasty lxv, and I shall never speak to lint again.''	''You'll never speak to Brian again I'' Mrs. Charrington could scarcely believe her ears. Brian the adored I Of whom even the Major was sometimes jealous ''Whatever has is' done ?"	"It's not what he's done, it's what lie's said. He---" Suddenly Elfle jumped from the bed, and running to the mirror, stood and gazed at her own reflection with long and intense earnestness.	She presented a quaint little figure. Mrs. Charrington, who once had been one of the best-dressed women in India, before the Major had lost the bulk of his money through helping a friend in what the friend had described as a "temporary embarrassment," had been clever enough, when they became poor-for what was a miserable three hundred a year pension ?-to abandon all effort after "smartness" and merely become ''artistic". "To achieve smartness costs a lot," she had said. "I must have spent two or three hundred a year on my clothes in darling Madras; here I shall have two or three hundred shillings!" She had spoken with bitter resentment. Dress had been the salt of her life, and it was hard upon her, she felt. The Major groaned when he contemplated the hard ness. If only he'd not been so credulous! If only he'd no been a fool I The truly generous people are nearly always poor. "So, as I can't be smart, I'll be artistic. Artistid clothing is cheap-a length of green cloth stitched up the back, with a couple of holes for arms, is sufficient-it is effective, and	1'-	' 'e lih'- ' -	.\t'l thai Prrtvel '-itre hadAN uNi)eissI;r	i<ciE	19provided her with leor (it rid lsh i3tirne-J uiles tinge and green eyes had been a di.tinct asset at the start, she had felt.	'Becoming artistic'' had certainly helped her through her lust poverty-stricken year, as she described it ever)' (lay to the Major with plaintive iteration, to settle down at Wistaria. Terrace, for not only was she to reverse the order of things, and from the butterfly become a chrysalis, but so was her little daughter white, frilly frocks and petticoats were expensive, so were laundresses. Elfie was not a little girl who liked primly to stay indoors and keep herself clean she gloried in tumbling about grass and searching for fairies in bracken that stained, or sitting on muddy river banks with her father. So she, too, was put into greens and browns of soft artistic shade, and frocks and coats and hats of quaint and artistic shape. Sometimes the brown stockings would wrinkle on her thin little legs-a button would bi-, missing from her suspenders, or a bit of white flesh would be visible owing to a hook being minus an eye on the yoke of her smocked frock, and not till after many hints from the children at school, or Brian, or even shy Humphry Doyle next door, would these little untidinesses he corrected, and then probably not by Mrs. Charrington, but by the child herself, who, with face screwed up, would try to persuade the eye to settle down exactly opposite the hook, which, as everyone knows, is a most difficult and laborious business.	Vet, in spite of a want of neatness-for besides missing hooks and eyes and buttons and wrinkly stockings there was always Elfie's unruly curly hair to contend with, hair which would not lie down and behave itself-in spite of, as poverty increased, the frocks and hats becoming weather-stained and shabby, Elfie somehow always made an attractive little hgnre.	She reminds me of a brown leaf fluttering before the wind,'' Mrs. Ingleby, Brian's mother, once said. But Major('hiarrington got nearer to it when he called her his little Wood-Elf. And like a veritable wood-elf, indeed, she looked as sheduiced beside him through their favourite haunts in Rich-mend Park along the avenue of hornbeams on their way toJ Paeken Slope, that ferny, liosky, delightful slope which lies	tween Sndhrook Park and Ham Lodge, and in whose green ft pths the Major and RIfle knew, if they searched long enough, Ivy would one day discover elves and gnomes and other lmttle people" dancing in the fairy rings.	fhere was no trace of self-consciousness or vanity in Elfie's N pression now as she examined herself so earnestly in the lung mirror, only a look of thoughtful inquiry. As a matter of cxaetitude, till a couple of hours ago she had never in her life ft\(n her i)we appearance a eanienre rmlleei'e. Yet she20	N	i:NDRES5ED	ii LcOINEhad an extraordor;trv sense of the heautilu and love of eauty. Ugly things, ugh' people, repulsive sights, facial blemishes, a scar, a birthmark, a malformed limb hurt her physically. So if it were true what Brian had said, and Mr. Dobbs had implied, she would suffer horribly indeed she knew she could never he happy again. The cod's mouth that wide hideous slit, danced before her straining eyes. It her own were really like that, how could she bear it ? (And Brian had said it as though he meant it.) She passed her hands over her lips. With Icr	finger and thumb she measured their width . 	She forgother mother lying there, her father below, who would sourwake up and be cold arid unhappy arid want something hotand comforting. She forgot that she herself was very hungryand wanted her supper. She only remembered that she waslike a cod.	"What is it, Rifle ?" Mrs. Charrington had been watching the child curiously.With a start RIfle came hack to the room.	"Nothing,'' she replied, "at least nothing that 1 can talk about," She moved towards the door and opened it. "I will go and see to father" she said. RIfle never toll icr ''iothr'r anything that lay very near to her heart. She knew that she would not understandCHAPTER IIIN WHICH ELFIE PAWNS A GOLD LOCKETANP CHAINEuna arid Hnmphry Doyle were in the habit each morning of walking together to Brewers Lane on their way to school. RIfle went to a Miss Brereton's in one of the Hill roads-the Richmond vernacular for one of the roads leading up to the Hill and Terrace, and Humpbry via the District Railway to St. Paul's.	Humphry at this time was a long-legged youth-for he looked more than a boy-of fifteen. He was dark and grave and only just escaped appearing sullen because he possessed a curiously nice brown pair of eyes. He had a long slouching gait, and ElSe always had much ado to keep up with him. Yet, though he liked to have her with him, lie never moderated iris pace, and she never dreamed of not walking with him. SoAN UNDRESSED hEROINE	2!-.lie would give as long a stride as the length of her legs pernitted, and then, nearly losing her balance, a series of little it] mpy runs.	The morning alter the events related in the last chapter, on icaring the point where the roads diverged, Elfie suddenly asked: "Do you know how much a codfish would cost ?"	Hiimphry started. She frequently asked him strange questions, but this was unusually out of the common.	He stood and considered. Humphry never thought in a hurry.	"I should think it would depend on its size," he said at length, with a judicial air."Well, say a rather large one."'I don't know. I should ask Mr. Dobbs."	"And that's just what I can't do." Elfie with the point of her shoe kicked at a tuft of grass on the wet green. They were about a dozen paces from Brewers Lane, and she was immensely relieved to find the cod had vanished. Her sleep had been broken by vivid dreams of encountering it again in the broad light of morning.	"Why not ?" Humphry was aware of the strong friendship that existed between Mr. Dobbs and Elfie.	"I have reasons-and I was forgetting I don't want to go down Brewers Lane this morning. Mr. Dobbs might see me and be angry. At least I don't think he'd be really angry, he's too nice and kind-still I should feel uncomfortable andI'll pay him somehow" (most of this in a murmur to herself). "I'll go on with you to Duke Street, it's not much further."	Humphry made no comment on this cryptic utterance and asked no questions. If she wanted to explain what she was talking about he was ready to listen and be interested, otherwise, he knew, no questioning on earth would force her to be communicative.	At the corner of Duke Street she said: "Do you pass any fish shops on your way to St. Paul's ?"He replied he'd never noticed, suppressing his surprise,	"Well, if you do, will you call and ask the price of cod yesterday ?""Yesterday! Don't you mean today ?"	She shook her head. "No, I could find that out for myself; Ht it's yesterday that's the trouble. Mr. Dobbs says one Jay it's cheap, the next dear, and-I want to be fair. I hope you're not missing your train, because if you are-"	"Oh no," said Humphry, "I've five minutes. But-" rnally El.fie was rather astonishing this morning IWhat was she up to? He examined her thoughtfully, butfund her appearance quite calm and normal. "Can t you22	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEask yourself ?" he suggested. He was a shy boy, and the den of entering a strange shop and inquiring yesterday's pricean article filled him with repugnance.	"1 could," said Elfie, 'but they might know me at Chrisp on [Jill Rise and we don't deal there"-she spoke in her deliciously old-fashioned manner--and the man at the corner speaks so loudly and is always in such a hurry. II: frightens me when he's shouting to the young lady at the desk: 'Two lemon soles, five Cardigan; four pounds turbot, seventyone Queen's'. He'd never listen to me."	"But," said Humphry, "I don't like to. The man would think me such a blithering idiot to ask him such a question,he'd think I was oft my chump,--"Very well," flashed Elfie, "you needn't say any more.	I-I might have known 	You never will do anythingfor anybody but yourself, Humphry Doyle. Good-bye." Shedarted down the street, refusing to turn in response to hiscry "Elfin, I will 1 Stop!" She was a very proud little girland over asked a person a second time to do her a fa von].	She was flying down the Hill on her way home from school when she ran plump into Brian lngleby just outside Chrisp the fishmonger's.	Brian was on his way for a walk with his tutor, a talkative man of the name of Occles. Mr. Occles was coaching the boy for a few months preparatory to his going to Harr 'w, where his parents were ambitious their son should take a good place. He was a clever enough boy, but lazy, and Inid worked but in desultory fashion at the school he had attended for some years at Ealing.	"Hullo!" he cried, obviously pleased at the encounter. RIfle, of course, was only a girl, but she was such a jelly bright one, and anything was better than Mr. Occles, iio was so painfully chatty and "palhish", it got on Brian's nervBrian considered a tutor should be just a tutor (to be horn' with resignation), and nothing more nor less. He didn't want him as a companion, or to he "talked-down" to, it hurt hi, pride. He was fourteen, and in many ways much more of a man of the world, he considered, than Mr. Occles, who, if lie followed his natural bent, was a scholar pure and simpi', though liking to be thought a "bit of a dog"; and the 1ev greatly disliked these morning walks, when Mr. Occles won! I enthusiastically discuss cricket or footer, of which he knew absolutely nothing.'he li"i:in', le erfnl :nd frieodlv yrn]'±ine Elfie repliedAN UN OItE5SEI) HEXOINE	23e tb a curt nod, and drawing up her slim little brown figure to is full height, she walked into the fishmonger's.	Brian stood and stared in surprise. Then he followed tier. What's up, Elfie ? Aren't you coming for a walk with ushen you've finished here ?" ''No, thank you.'''But we will wait for you."'1 don't want you to, thanks.""Why not 1'	"Because I don't and please go. I want to speak to Mr. Clirisp.''	"He's busy, and you'll be ever so long here before you're erved."Elfic did not reply, and turned her back on him.	Brian refused to be snubbed. "Couldn't you call on your way home ? It will be emptier then." He had caught sight of Mr. Occles outside on the pavement violently gesticulating to him to "come on", and he felt strangely averse to "coming on" without Elfie and being forced to listen to the tutor's voluble chatter, He, Brian, did the talking when he was with l'llie, and she was sec a splendid and sympathetic listener. Wonderfully understan 1 ng, too, for a girl, and always up to a ark. "Do come," he urged	"No, Brian." Suddenly she swept round upon him. "I'm licE coming, and I'm never coming again with you, so there! If you stood there till next year I wouldn't go a walk with you, for I-i hate you." Her small face was quivering with emotion, and Brian stood too amazed to speak for a moment.	"Go !" she cried, stamping her foot on the sawdust floor and causing an elderly lady near her to jump with surprise, and never speak to me again."And Brian, whistling softly to himself, went.	She stood for a little while with heaving chest, oblivious to her surroundings. People crushed by her up to the desk to pay for their goods, others, attended by blue-aproned hurried salesmen, selected their soles, halibut, or plaice and passed out. No one took any notice of the little girl standing as one in a dream; she was so slim she took up very little room in the shop, and was so quiet and unobtruive she mightn't have been there at all. She was thinking deeply. Now that she had sent Brian about his business a such summary fashion she was almost wishing she hadn't, flow was she going to live without "being friends with him"Such a state was well nigh inconceivable. She felt frightfully unhappy. He had hurt her. He had said a cruel thing, but she had already returned it a thousandfold by telling him she hated him. And she hadn't meant it either. She didn't hate him. She loved him in spite of everything; and she would24	AN UNDRESSED HEROIN Ealways love him whatever he said or did, lust because he was Brian.	Presently she came back to her surroundings and, catching sight of a clock, knew that she must hurry. Her mother had said she wished her to go upon sonic errands before the midday dinner.	The shop was still congested, and seeing that no salesman would be free to serve her for some time to come, she elbowed her way through the crowd, to the end of the shop, and addressed a thin warty man who was washing and scaling fish beneath a running tap.	"Can you tell me," she asked, without preamble, and disregarding the fact that from his stolid and indifferent demeanour he meant her clearly to understand he'd not the slightest intention of listening to anything she might have to say, "what was the price of cod yesterday ?" And immediately his attention was arrested. Had she said "today", the warty man would have ignored her, but the unexpected "yesterday" caused his eyes to travel from a sole he was filleting to the little girl. His ears must have misinformed him. To ask the price of yesterday's fish was as ridiculous as a man at a bar calling for a glass of beer for tomorrow."The price of cod today you mean ?" he said correctively.	"No, I don't," she replied. "I mean yesterday. I know' what it is today; eightpence a pound, I saw it marked up as I came into the shop. What I want to know is, was it eightpence yesterday ?"	"Oh!" the man saw daylight, "something wrong with your ma's bill? Go to the desk, please." He returned to his filleting, annoyed that she'd wasted his time.	"There is nothing wrong with any bill," returned Hub. "We don't deal here, and I'm sorry to bother you, but can't you answer my question-it would only take you a second, or are you too busy? Because if so I must go to another fish shop, it's important, and I'm afraid I shall be late home."	The man regarded the small persistent person before him with freshly awakened curiosity. She might have buc'n a brown moth which had fluttered in through the crowds of pushing, impatient people and which conceivably might get crushed in fluttering out again, such a bit of a thing was she Suddenly he felt called upon to be civil."It was sevenpence," he said, "by taking the whole fish.'	"Oh," she ejaculated, "a penny cheaper than today, and it would be less in Brewers I.,ane, wouldn't it ?""Possibly," said the man with caution. "I can't be sure."	"Oh, can't you do try. It's so important. A penny a jolilid mdc': such a difference in a big fish when one has nothin.AN		UNDRESSED	IlijilOiNE	25I'll,- man past d a scaly hand across his orehead.I mean," she corrected herself, 'almost nothing. Perhaps	ic and six in my money-box, but certainly not more. Now cHat would the weight be of that cod ?" She pointed to one halfway down the marble slab. ''That would be about the same size as the one I threw away yesterday-I mean"stammeringly-' 'the one 1 saw in Brewers Lane Can you tell me, then I won't trouble you any more 1""About ten pounds, ' replied the man briefly.	He was now convinced the little girl was not right in her head, but if humoured might go away quietly.	''Ten pounds !'' she cried in dismay. ''What shall I do I It's worse than 1 thought. Ten sevens are seventy. Seventy pence are-" She moved away. "Seventy pence areoh, what are they 1 1 must go back to the beginning or I can't do it twelve pence are one shilling, twenty pence one and eightpence." Rapidly she ran through her pence table.	Sixty pence are five shillings, seventy pence are five and tenpence. It's a dreadful lot." She paused with knitted brow and stared with deep longing at the cod. Then, remembering her manners, she went hack to the warty man, who had resumed his work beneath the running tap "Thank you," she said politely. "I was forgetting."''Oh, don't mention it,'' said he.Musingly he returned to his filleting. Sadly Elfiewent home.Ii	Later that day she and Bridget might have been seen standing outside a pawnshop in Paved Court, which abutts on to King Street.	Both appeared nervous; or, as Rifle herself described it, "twittery inside".	"I feel I've got a bird or something trying to fly out of my stomach," she said graphically.	"Oh, Miss RIfle." Bridget clutched at her heart. 'I've never been inside such a place in me life It's terrible. Think if your pa knew. You'd better wait, darlint, till I get me wages, then I'll lend it to you."	Elfie shook her head firmly. "No, Bridget. Father once 0,1,1 me the way to hell was paved with borrowed money."Good intentions," corrected Bridget.He said it was the same thing.""Hut he'd have given you the money himself.'	lie hasn't-" Elfie stopped. Bridget mustn't know lw poor they were. Servants shouldn't know these things.IHhc little kniw how 4 ten Bridget went without her full
e NC.			i'm H 'wages ior the saioi of the lear elarli I. 2.lnjt i tn . [ia it lieOnly that morning she'd heard her father, roused from hi customary evenness of temper, shout at her mother that hen not a sixpence to bless himself with till his quarterly pension came.	"Let us,'' she said hurriedly, 'go inside before anyone sees us. I-I feel brave enough now." With one hand she clutched a small white paper parcel, with the other she clung to Bridget, who was a large and solid person.	A medium-sized man with black eyes and a hooky nose received them affably, took the parcel from Elfie's trembling hand with the air of one who does such things a hundred times a day and which at once put Elfie at her ease, opened it, withdrew from a small box a thin gold chain and heartshaped locket ornamented with a single pearl, and said with a business-like snap "Five shillings, miss."	FIfe squeezed Bridget's arm. The sum named was just sufficient to cover what she wanted, and after all Bridget had said about pawnbrokers being nothing but thieves and liars of the blackest and deepest dye, she felt Mr. Cohen was behaving quite generously. Still she kept her head.	"Can't you say six and sixpence ?" She checked a gasp of amazement at her own unexpected temerity.	Mr. Cohen replied in the negative. "I've hundreds of them on my hands now," he said with a pleasant frank smile.	"Ah, then, you won't want to sell mine P EIfle was perceptibly relieved."Sell yours ?"	'1 mean you'll wait till 1 can come and get it out again -buy it back? I shall have a birthday soon, and Mrs. Tug..a friend always gives me five shillings."	"It depends how long it is. I can't keep things waiting about for ever, or-1 shouldn't he here."	"Of course you wouldn't," agreed Elfie, feeling greatly relieved that he was. "If I take five shillings now, will you wait three weeks for me to-to 11	"Redeem it," said Mr. Cohen. "Very well, and of course there'll he the interest. I don't lend you five shillings for nothing, you know." He spoke a trifle impudently.	"I know," returned FIfe with dignity. "I shall have plenty of money-presently."	Bridget strangled a laugh. What a cute, old-fashioned thing she was I So old, older than the Major himself in many ways in her worldly wisdom, in her realization and calm acceptance of the seamy side of life and yet such a baby in others in her belief in fairies (and did not Bridget secretly believe in them, too, after the manner of understanding and properly constructed Irish people ?) and her conviction thatAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	27	lAeis and treLs and stars and the river all possessed feelings .end thoughts and talked and played with one another.	"We don't know that they can't feel, so why should we say they can't, or talk or play. J know that they can. I often tear the trees on the Beloved Isle chattering away to the river is it runs by, and see the stars laughing at them. You may laugh, Bridget," indignantly, "but father agrees with me."	"Just a couple of babes together." So Bridget regarded them, and it made her queer to hear their mazy talk, she stid to her friend Mrs. Povey, who walked out with her of a \\'ednesday evening. "You'd think they weren't right in their heads, if you didn't know they were.''	The transaction completed, Elfie, with a last lingering glance at her locket and chain lying on the counter, and a itch looked unusually beautiful she thought, followed IThiclget out of the shop. "I must leave you now," she said, "nd thank you very much for coming with me."	But aren't you coming back to tea ?" the servant demurred. "Your father's at home, and I'll be bound he's lookin' for \nu"-Elfie and Bridget had met by appointment outside the pawnshop after school, and it was now half past four--and you know he doesn't like your bein' about, darlint, after dark."	'I shan't be long. I shall be in at five for tea I-I have other business. Good-bye, Bridget,"	The child flitted along King Street and darted across Hill Rise to the fishmonger's she had visited in the morning. In her hand she firmly grasped the five shillings, supplemented lrv elevenpence she had extracted from her money-box, and .,;()on she was in the midst of a deal with Mr. Chrisp in reference to a codfish she had selected from several others with the r(-quest that it should be weighed.	"Nine and a half," said Mr. Chrisp in a mournful voice, 1 he was mournful by nature and no one knew why, for his shop did a roaring trade."And that will be how much ?" inquired Elfie."Six and four."	"Six and fourpence! Oh, dear." Elfie looked at the ,,(,(!fish ; it was just about the size of the one she had pro"eted on to the Green and nicer looking, she thought. She ads getting accustomed to the appearance of cods' mouths, ted could stare at them now without flinching. "I'm afraid s's too much," she said,''I haven't a smaller.""1 don't mean its size. It's just right; but too much money."	"If you can get a cheaper, you're welcome," observed ir. Ch risp with a deep sigh, removing the cod from the scales ted dithering it down the marble slab to the others."Is it eightpence a pound ?"28	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE"It is."'It was only sevenpence yesterday.""It was.""Why is it dearer today I'Because the cod were shy'Shy I"'Refused to come to the nets."'Oh !" said she. "You mean they are scarcer today?"	"That's it," said Mr. Chrisp. He was not particularly busy. Between three and five of an afternoon was his slack time and if a funny little girl wanted to come and discuss business with him he was ready to meet her half-way. Elfie opened the palm of her right hand and examined her money. She knew it only added up to five and elevenpence, and nothing, short of a miracle, would make it more. Yet she counted it. Mr. Chrisp watched her.	"You see," she said a little nervously, '1 have only five and elevenpence with me, so that is fivepenc" short " (She had worked it out on her fingers.)"It is," agreed Mr. Chrisp lugubriously.	Elfie felt in despair. Oh, how she \vislIc'ci she ha(l stood out for six and sixpence froni Mr. Cohen I She believed if she'd been firm he would have yielded. Never for a moment did it enter her head to borrow the fivepence from a friend-say Humphry, or Mrs. Ingleby. She felt she must just grapple with the problem alone and unaided.	Suddenly a bright and daring thought came to her, and her cheeks flushed. "Mr. Chrisp," she said, "I do want that codfish so badly. Will you let me owe you the fivepenceHere is the five and elevenpence." She opened her hand again and offered it to him. "I get a penny from my father every Saturday. In five weeks I shall have saved fivepence, and I will bring it to you-I promise faithfully." In her earnestness she leant against a lump of ice, which suddenly crashed to the floor, causing her nearly to jump out of her skin. "Oh,'' she cried, "I'm sorry!" It seemed to her she spread chaos and ruin in every fish shop she entered.	Mr. Chrisp kicked the ice, now covered with sawdust, beneath the counter, picked up the cod, wrapped it in newspaper first, with an outer covering of brown paper, put it into a ash-basket, and handed it to her without another word excepting to say briefly : "Five and elevenpence."	Elfie received it joyfully, the colour coming and going in her cheeks as she handed him the money. "Thank you ver'r much," she said. "and-I will bring you the fivepence 1 won't forget."	"Five and elevenpence i my price," said Mr Chrisp 'no mcli' nod no less,N UNDRESSED HEROINE	29	1 won't take your fivepence," thundered Mr. Chrisp. "and I'm busy. Good-night."And Elfie tied.IV	Staggering beneath the weight of the basket, she crept along George Street and cautiously down Brewers Lane with the covert slinking movements of a criminal. Then she took her bearings a pace or two from Mr. Dobbs's shop and furtively glanced around. Few people were about, and-to her joy-Mr. Dobbs was nowhere to be seen: indeed, the shop was empty.	On tiptoe she stole in, placed the basket in the middle of the slab-she dared not pause to take out the cod, and Mr. Dobbs could not fail to see the basket. Then, extracting from her coat pocket a little pink note, with a darting, bird-like movement she stuck it conspicuously into a flower-pot containing a faded asiiidistra, and, finally, gently withdrew. Her actions had been witnessed only by the errand boy of the newspaper shop opposite, and he being accustomed to the little girl doing queer things at Dobbs's," thought no more about the matter.	When Mr. Dobbs came in ten minutes later, and saw the basket sitting there among some whiting and herrings, he rubbed his eyes. When he'd extracted the cod, he remarked: "Lord lumme !' When he'd discovered and read the little note he found those eyes suddenly dimmed, for Mr. Dobbs, being stout, was also emotional This was its context:Dear Mr Dobbs,	I am leeving you a coddfislz insted of the one I threw away last night, and I'm so sorry fore being so rude. Pleas' forgive meYew affectionate friend,	El/fe Clia;'ii ntonCHAPTER IIIELFIE HARDENS HER HEART AND THEN FORGIVES	Jrr'iir and Brian's quarrel laRted br a week	Yo her it30	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEseemed a lifetime, and she fretted greatly in secret at their estrangement. Life without Brian was-well, not dull. It could never be dull so long as she had her dear, delightful, amusing father, but not quite so exciting as life in which Brian bad played a large and important part.	The Inglebys lived but a stone's throw from the Charringtons, and scarcely a day had passed since the Charringtons' arrival from India on which the big boy-Brian had always loomed very big and masculine in Elfie's eyes and the little girl had not met and played together.	Mrs. Inglehy had encouraged the friendship. Brian being an only child might, she feared, become selfish and masterful. To a little girl five years his junior he couldn't be anything but decent and kind if he were a nice boy, and of course he was a nice boy. And if he weren't, well-Rifle would help to make him one, for was not she a little girl in a thousandMrs. Inglehy loved Elfie much more than her own mother loved her, and for the child she felt a deep and maternal pity. To be so neglected, so allowed to run wild at her tender age, to have had such experience crammed already into her little hte, filled Mrs. Ingleby with fierce anger and distress at her own impotence to alter matters.	'I can do nothing," she said one day to Mr. inglehy, shaken and miserable at having seen Elfie guiding her father's footsteps across the Green. "It's horrible; only nine, and she accepts the situation as calmly as she eats her bread and butter. I would like to shake that woman . . . . It's her heartlessness, her selfishness, her constant repining for her old life, that has brought him to this. He's a dear man, really."	"I know," said Mr. Ingleby, "but you'd think for the little girl's sake-"	"He can't. He tries and tries. You can see it in his face. He tries with all his strength-for he worships the child, but, like many a fine man, he's weak in this one respect. His will power fails him at the critical moment. I've seen him strugghog with himself, poor fellow. Seen him hesitate at the corner of King Street, then, squaring his shoulders, walk on. Turn, hesitate, again walk on. Once again turn-now it's raining. He hates the wet and cold like a cat, he struggles desperately, people go by, a grim tragedy is being played out before their eyes, but fortunately for him they do not see it. . . A couple	of minutes pass . 	He has disappeared ; the 'Spiders' hasswallowed him up, and--later Elfie helps him home! Poordarling."	Once she said to Brian: "If ever you are unkind to Elfie, ever hurt her, you are my son no longer. Remember."Impressed with her earnestness, he asked her why-whyAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	31Elfie more than lfosamond Arkwriglit or Stella Green, or any other girl he knew.	"Because," replied his mother, 'Elfie is different. She feels things more. She is sensitive, Then Rosamond and Stella have nice-blessings'' (she was about to say parents) "that little Flue does not possess, and on that account one should he gentler, kinder, more tender towards her,"	"Oh, I'll be nice to her," Brian spoke with boyish condescension. "You see, 1 like her. She's nearly as good as a boy-and in some ways better." And he had been nice to her, so nice through the years that Rifle little short of worshipped him, and this week without him had been as an aching void.	She pretended, of course, that she didn't care. When her father rallied her about his absence, she said she was "out of him", without offering any further explanation, and Major Charrington, like a wise man, asked no questions. Children's quarrels, he knew, were to the children very iniportant, full of tragedy, and best left to right themselves. As long, too, as the "out of friends" state of affairs existed, lie had his little daughter more to himself. RIfle at hand meant strength. Elfie to take for walks-and did they not know the most delectable spots in Richmond for their excursions ?meant an object, a delightful thing to live for and, necessarily, a lessening desire for other things that led to inevitable misery and shame.	These walks to the Major always had been the most attractive feature of his life in Richmond. He liked walks (with Elfie for a companion) and he liked Richmond (certain parts of it known to him and Elfie). And RIfle liked walks (with her father), and she, too, liked Richmond (certain parts of it).	The parts they liked best, of course, were by the river, because they were both born river lovers. They adored their own river, their own special bit, every inch of it from Twickenham Ferry up stream (taking their house in Wistaria Terrace as a starting-point) to Mew Gardens down stream. Scarcely a day passed that did not see them arm in arm-RIfle objected to hand-clasping as being too babyish, and it meant somewhat of a straining effort on her part, reaching up to her big father's arm, but she somehow managed it-wandering along some stretch of the river banks deep in excited discussion is to an appropriate name for an island, or a heron, or a field,	r a house, or for anything, in fact, that came their way during that particular ramble.	Long ago they'd christened Richmond Bridge. "The Bridge of Delight" for everyday use, but it had its variations. For example, when in late autumn a white brooding mist hung about the old curved arches, it became "The Bridge of Dreams". And when on radiant summer evenings the sunset32	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEsky laid a glowing finger upon the subdued grey stone, lighting it up with flame-like brilliance, it became "The Rainbow Span". And when, again, on wild winter nights, the wind whistled and howled among the solid buttresses was it not "The Bridge of Sighs ?'' And the lovely part of it all, according to Elfie, was that you never knew from day to (lay what sort of a bridge it was going to turn into the next.	The islands, too, had their names, the three ot them that lie between the bridge and the South Western Railway Bridge -and to the South Western Railway Bridge Elfie and Major Charrington always tightly shut their eyes, pretending it wasn't there. "A railway bridge across a river may be, arid is perhaps a necessity,'' said the Major "but we needn't recognize it, Elfie. We can always cut it dead, cut it dead for its ugliness, poor thing." And so tightly did they shut their eyes in passing it that it was often sheer luck they did not tumble into the river itself. But to return to the island. The first and largest, which lived just opposite to Wistaria Terrace, really answered to the name of Corporation Isle. Corporation Isle I It was a terrible, a common, an unromantic, a sordid name, and "not to be borne for one single moment," said Major Cliarrington. For did it not conjure up in the flash of an eyelid dreadful and dull things like mayors and aldermen and gold chains of office and big dinners and dyspepsia ? An island full of mystery t An island fringed with dipping willow trees l An island trimmed with an oak tree of perfect shape which even outdid the weeping willows in the tender delicacy of its green in the early spring, and three tall, rustling poplars which seemed to hold out reaching fingers, when their leaves were gone, to the golden wintry sky at sunset-time. An island in which little river birds nested, and swans took their afternoon siesta "An island," the Major said, as he and Elfie gazed lovingly upon it from the balcony of their drawingroom windows, ''so full of delicious possibilities that you never knew what one day it might not reveal." And to be called Corporation It was horrible So they changed its name. Other people might be stupid and unenterprising enough to continue doing as they were told, and giving it its hideous appellation--but not the Major and Elfic-they kicked over the traces-for were they not lawless by nature	They cudgelled their brains. For days they discussed every probable and improbable name under the sun; and I believe it was Elfie in the end who put the idea of the "Beloved Isle" into her father's head, because she kept on saying they loved it so much-their island that lived opposite to them-that they must he frightfully careful, or it might get offended. So the "Beloved Isle" it became, and they peopled it with fairies and fauas, and other delicious phautasiesAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	33	The Major hit upon Half way Isle'' for the in-xt little island lower clown stream, for it was situated exactly midway between the ''Beloved isle'' and the wee clot of an island near to the Railway Bridge and Rifle thought it very appropriate. Finally, came the question of a name for the wee island itself. Brian, she Suggested, should be consulted here, for was it not opposite-just as opposite to Cholniondeley Court, where he lived, as the ''Beloved Isle'' was opposite to Number i, Wistaria Terrace, where she lived ? It was therefore only fair he should have a voice in the matter. But the Major demurred. They had not consulted the Doyles at '<umber 2, or the \\'aghorns at Number 3, or Miss Perry at Number 4, about the reehristening of Corporation Isle, so why should Brian be dragged in ? Moreover, he was sure Brian would not care. An island to him was just a useful piece of land to which a boat could be moored when he was fishing. So Elfie gave in. Her father, she knew, was right. Brian did not like playing at ''make believe things".	But clays had passed, and many walks were taken, and there had been much cogitation and discussion before Elfie stumbled sort of accidentally one afternoon-and it had happened to be an exceedingly lovely summer afternoonupon "Duck-of-an-Isle" and straightway the Major composed the following little poems (he and RIfle were great at writing poems)'I know an isle called Duck-of-an-Isle That lives in the River Thames, Its trimmed with willows-the weepy sort. With slender swaying stemsWhich dip green leaves when the day is hot into the clear cool stream, And shed them later--golden and brown, When Summer has passed like a dreaml)nclc-oi-rn-lde is a clear wee isle, Silent and sylvan and sweet Mrs Swan builds her nest in the bank. While Mr. Swan stretches his feet.Soon little s's anlets- possibly six---.,Not swaalets, Daddy.'' interrupted RIfle. ''Cygnets.''''Don't you like swanlets better ?'' he askedShe tliuuyht. ''Perhaps I (10. Yes.'''Soon little swanlets-possibly six, Will be swimming about with their mother, Five of them girls, all of them pearls. And one little rascally brother."34	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	Elfie approved of the poem. She said she thought it rather sweet. "Mine are not so good," she said, "but I think some of my stories are better-don't you ? More exciting."	The Major agreed. "Especially the one you are writing now. 1-low is it going to end ? Are they going to get married I You left off, you will recollect, in the middle of the most interesting part-they'd not enough money to get married."	"But they got some," said Elfie gravely. "Twenty pounds from a rich aunt, and they go to America, and in six weeks they have a large family of mixed children."	"Very sensible of them," observed the Major without moving a muscle, "doing their duty by their adopted country."	"Yes," said Ellie, "six boys and four girls and two twins. Their names were- Oh, there's a heron," she broke oil excitedly. They were near to Isleworth eyot and its muddy bank which herons love to frequent. "I wonder, Daddy, if it's Billy Binns ? I believe it is. He looks cross, doesn't heDo tell me about him, it's so long since you said it, and I'm forgetting some, Let's sit here and we'll be very quiet and then he won't go. P'raps he's fishing." She pushed bet father on to a bench beneath a giant chestnut which stretched spreading arms across the towing-path to the very water's edge, and again behind to the golf links in the Old Deer Park, in whose welcome leafy shade hot panting woolly sheer crouched, and ensconced herself on his knee. "Now, Daddy, say it softly in case it is Billy and lie should hear.' And tho Major, with his arm about her, complied"I knew a long-legged heron Whose name was Billy Binns; He'd many pleasant virtues And many naughty sins.His haunts were down at lsleworth, just by the osier-bed; And there he'd stand on one leg, With t'other scratch his head.One day he went a-fishing, And caught a nice plump dare, His wife she came and ate it up, He slapped her in the face."(Elfie always squirmed here with a half-fearful joy.)"She threatened him with lawyers, Policemen, magistrates, Aldermen and clergymen, And those who levy rates.AN		UNDR1L5SE13	1E1, 0 1 NE	35He said 'For those I care no more Than bumble-bees and rats, Eec scolding wives and squawking owls And little buzzing gnats.'	h' went oil to a lawyei.lie charged her six and eight,For telling her she was a fool,While scratching his bald pate'You brought it on yourself,' he said,'You gobbled tip his dace.I cannot give advice on suchA foolish hotch-potch case'Except to say another time Your husband catches fish, You cook them for him nicely, And p'raps he'll halve the dish.'She went back to her Billy, To touch him she did weep; 1-her tears were lost upon hum, For he was fast asleep.""It was rude and cross of Billy," observed Elfie reflectively,when her father had finished, "to slap her in the face, but ofcourse she did take his fish."	"What should you do," he asked teasingly, "if anyone, say Brian, did the same thing to you ?"	"I should slap him back," she retorted without hesitation, 'and then-I should forgive him,"	She was seven when she said this, and two years later she did, fignrativxdv spealciig, return Brian his blow for blowand then hecai>- -dit' loved him she nr,ave him.	FJ!tii- u-as seated in tin' kitchen reading aloud to Bridget -Bridget was cleaning silver-when Brian, at the end of his tether, for lie had missed Elfie nearly as much as she had missed him, started forth) from the little iron river gate	Cholmondeley Court for Number i, Wistaria Terrace to make his peace. It was a half-holiday for both. Mrs. I igleby had suggested that Elfie should be invited to tea. dy was ignorant of their quarrel, but it seemed to her some 'lays since Elfie had been to see them. Brian had at firsttnurred to the proposition. He was too old, he said, to	tintie to spend his half-holidays with girls of F.lfie's age. It had hen different when tie was younger, then he hadn't35	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEminded and had taken pity on Rifle because of her loneliness. But now-well, naturally, he wanted to be with boys, boys of his own age, and the other boys of Richmond would make game of him if he went mooching about with a kid of nine. He was only pretending, and his mother knew it. Mrs. Ingleby could read her two male belongings, husband and son, like a book, but she never let them know she could. When they pretended, so did she. She was a wise woman, and they both adored her. She knew Brian appreciated the friendship of the little girl and wanted her now.	"She's nearly ten, and years older than you, or any other boy for the matter of that, in most things," she said, "and as jolly a companion as anyone could wish to have."	"Oh, she's all that," conceded Brian, "and-well, I suppose I must go. Perhaps she'll he expecting to be asked as it's a Saturday." In reality he was glad of an excuse to call. In view of her last words to him, "I hate you," he could hardly call without some sort of an excuse for so doing. It would be beneath his dignity. But having a message, an invitation from his mother, would alter the face of things. He could deliver it with an easy nonchalance, just as though her acceptance of it or non-acceptance (and Elfie would never refuse) were a matter of supreme indifference to him either way.	"She'll come round," lie thought, as he took his way along the towing-path; "whatever she was so infernally ratty about she'll have forgotten, or if she hasn't-for girls are queershe'll pretend she has because she'll have missed me so much. She doesn't like Humphry, and she's not too pally with any of the girls at school. She likes me best, and I expect she's watching from the window for me now." Boys, like men, are vain.Brian, as we know, was mistaken in his assumption.	RUle was far too deeply engrossed in her reading aloud to Bridget-it was a story of her own composition, called The Baffled Spinster-to be standing at windows watching for a boy whom she had definitely decided to thrust from her life for ever, however much it might hurt her to do so. Brian did not love her. He had proved it. He had offended her deeply. He had said her mouth was like a cod's. She knew now what a cod's mouth looked like. She had studied it closely. She could hear it now. She had got used to the idea, just as poor Mr. Buss at the paper-shop up the hill had to bear a large lump at the side of his neck-a lump that shook as he walked; but that Brian should have been the one to acquaint her with the desolating fact	"His nose is not beautiful," she said to herself, 'but I should never have dreamt of saying: 'Brian, your nose isAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	37like a Barcelona nut-I am too fond of him. We don't say cruel things to people we love. So Brian can't love me. If he doesn't love me, I don't want him to be my friend."	So she decided to fill her life with other things; other things less satisfying, less exciting than Brian, but still things that were interesting. The Baffled Spinster was one of them. It already filled two penny exercise-books, and was in Elfie's best handwriting and in indelible blue pencil. She used a pencil because she liked to sit about in odd, attractive places '.cith her manuscript; the window-seat in the drawing-room, whence she could see the Beloved Isle, and the bare crooked boughs of the oak tree, which looked like misshapen limbs against the red sky (when there was a fine sunset). Or at the foot of her father's bed in the small, back, cheerless top room which looked north, when of an early morning she'd made with her own hands and carried up to him a cup of tea. At the foot of this bed was a black, painted iron rail, very comfortable to lean against whilst she wrote on her knee, or read aloud to him (while he drank his tea) the latest "goings-on" of the "Baffled Spinster". Sometimes he made suggestions to her; occasionally they were quite good ones, and she told him so, and he was becomingly and modestly pleased. This very morning, in fact, he had offered to her a most thrilling idea, in the working out of which virtue triumphed, and vice (the Baffled Spinster), wearing her best white muslin frock, fell into a pond, quite shallow (there were many vicissitudes for her to pass through before Elfie finally burnt her to death), but covered with slimy green duck-weed which the Major and Elfie had christened Jinny-Green-teeth.	Elfie, with Bridget listening all ears, so thrilled was she, had arrived at the palpitating bit where the Baffled Spinster -a green, slimy Baffled Spinster-is emerging from the pond as the handsome hero appears round the corner, when the tinkle of the front-door bell resounded through the house.	'Lawks !" ejaculated Bridget, putting down a silver saltcellar she was cleaning, and which she'd been anathematizing as being "that spotty it might be suffering from measles." 'I wonder who that is ?''	'Perhaps it will he a rates or gas man, with 'final notices,' said Elfie.	"Too early for those; they come end of next month. I'll go and see." Bridget, rising, peered up through the window to the front step above-one corner of which was just visiblebut whoever was there was standing well away on the other side, for no one was to be seen.	"I expect it's the Vicar," said Bridget, as she removed her coarse apron, revealing a snowy muslin one beneath, "and he'll want tea.''38	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"If it is," said Elfie, "I shall have it with you, and we'll have ripping toast."	"All right, darlint." Bridget left the kitchen and mounted the basement stairs. Some silver powder had adhered to her sleeve ; she paused to brush it away.	The hell sounded again-this time sharply. Brian, at the front :1 oor, was becoming impatient. The day was bitingly cold, some flakes of snow had begun to thicken the air, and he wore no overcoat. He longed to secure Elfie, race back with her to Cholmondeley Court to the nice, warm dining-room, where the children always had their tea at the long table, and eat hot buttered toast and home-made strawberry jam.	He beat a tattoo with his cold hands on the white-painted door.It opened suddenly.	Yes, to his inquiry, Miss Elfie was in, and would he walk into the dining-room, and Miss Elfie should be told.	The Charringtons' dining-room was shabby. It was quaint in shape, oval, and with panelled walls; but it was shabby, so shabby that it was almost offensive. The leather chairsgood ones-were scratched and stained and brown, and bits of horsehair stuffing protruded through small tears and cracks in the skins. The carpet, a handsome Turkey in its pristine days, was now merely a surface of string ill which a few tracings of laded wool were occasionally to he found. The Charriugtons had bought the furniture second-hand from the last tenants of the house for an old song. All of it, shabby when purchased, was still shabbier now. A faded serge cloth covered the dinner table, faded serge curtains hung at the windows. Altogether a depressing, cheerless room, redeemed from a sordid mediocrity by one thing only, and that was its view.	One forgot the room when one saw the view. And the view from the window of the dining-room of No. I, \Vistaria Terrace was quite different from the view from the drawingroom windows above, or if it were not different, strictly speaking, it seemed so. From the drawing-room you looked down on to your river, and the barges (sometimes delicious with brown-red sails) moored to the quay at the base of the Terrace. You looked down on to the Island and the Bridge of Delight. You looked down on to busy men with carts on the quay, loading and unloading the barges with sand and timber, flour and coal (the Major and RIfle always tightly shut their eyes to the coal barges, as they did to the South Western Railway Bridge, and never opened them again till the empty craft had ponderously drifted down stream with the out-going tide)- You looked down on to the myriads of little pleasureboats in the summer, and the fishermen sitting on stumpy black boxes with lumps of ground-bait at their sides and hope-AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	39ful looks on their faces, the fish themselves you were unable to perceive, but they were there-a few of them-below the surface of the water, eyeing the small bullets of white paste bobbing above them with a wink of theft eye and chatting to each other with amusement about the patient stupidity of the thing called man.	From the window of the dining-room few of these things could be seen, for the grey stone balustrade got in the way of the barges and fishermen, and the river gleamed through the interstices of the stonework, and there were heavenly peeps of the island and trees and sky. Trees looked at from the level are so different from trees looked at from above. From above they appear round and bunchy; from the level or better still, from below, one sees all their delicate traceries of leaves and sterns, and their slim, topmost branches, when they are bare of foliage, tapering away like spires of churches to quiet wintry skies.Brian stood at the window, but he gazed out with unseein-7es, and kicked at the shabby skirting-board impatiently. he room was cold. There was no fire. A gas-stove, oldfashioned in make and with a hissing, horrid sound when lighted, was used for heating the room for meals. In between times it was turned out for economy's sake.	What was Elfie doing? Why didn't she come ? he wondered. He gave the skirting-board an extra hard kick. He looked at his watch. They would be late for tea. It was now nearly half past four.	"Perhaps she's getting ready. She'll guess I've come to take her back." This Saturday tea at Cholmondeley Court, when Elfie wore her one and only decent frock, and her gold locket and chain (now reposing, alas! at Mr. Cohen's), had become, through the years, quite an institution.	Elfie, at the moment, was engaged in cleaning a mustardpot, while obstinately refusing to ascend the stairs to see Brian.	Bridget used all her Irish powers of persuasion, but the child was adamant.	"No," she said, with a decisive shake of her untidy head. 'I shall not see him. Tell him I'm engaged."	"But you're not, Miss Elfie." Bridget was scandalized at this departure from strict truth on the part of a little girl whose salient characteristic up to now had been truthfulness.	"Yes, I am. I'm reading to you, and we've got to the most exciting part of The Baffled Spinster, and I'm also busy with this mustard-pot. You'll never be finished unless I help you, Bridget." She spoke with grave importance, as she laid on to the silver lid with a leather and excessive energy.	Bridget was perplexed and troubled	Already in her40	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEromantic Celtic fashion she was weaving a pleasant future for Brian and Elfie, a future not dissociated with orangeblossom and wedding-hells and other pleasant things.	'1 can't go and tell him such untruths, Miss Elfie. I've the priest to consider and me soul to save." Bridget sat down firmly and turned her attention to a top-heavy hot-water jug in a battered, dented condition through frequent falls from trays and consequent rolling down the basement stairs.\Vell, then, he'll just stay there"- Elfic breathed on themustard-pot preparatory to a final polish up--and when he's tired, he'll go."	"What's made you so suddenly unkind ?" queried Bridget. "Throwin' him over for Master Humphry with his moody ways" (Elfie had twice gone out with Humphry during the week), "and Master Brian worshippin' the very ground you treads on--"He does nothing of the kind. He's a cruel, nasty boy-'	Suddenly a voice came from the top of the stairs "Are you there, Elfie ?""No, I'm not."	Bridget gasped at this further demonstration of a sudden and inexplicable attack of lying.	"When are you likely to be there?" There was a chastened pleading note in Brian's voice which caused Bridget's tender heart to melt within her.Elfie remained silent.''Max' I come down ?''Still Elfie remained silent.	"Please speak, Elfie. You might give a feller a chance and tell me what I've done. Mother says, will you come to teaWe're going to have strawberry jam and Devonshire cream, and we're going to roast chestnuts over the fire afterwards."	These proffered delicacies, which ordinarily would have caused her pulses to quicken with anticipatory delight, left Elfie entirely unmoved. She still remained mute, and picking up a sugar-basin liberally besmeared it with wet powder.	Bridget was scandalized. Such impoliteness, such a want of manners, such downright rudeness, in fact, to he going on in her kitchen Never had she heard of such a thing! And Miss Elfie customarily so polite Such a little lady Her cheeks crimsoned with shame. Then she lifted up her voice. The good name of the Charrington family-for was it not a real good, old, well-born family, with a long line of ancestors, all Majors and Colonels and even Generals, as Bridget often told herself, to keep up her spirits and pride in "the family" when the poor Major came lurching home. "You come on down, Master Brian. I'll be perlite to you, even if Miss Elfie won't, for she's sittin' here roight enough. I was taught me.\N		UNI)NISSLI)	1Ii.1<OINJ	41manners in Onld Oirland, Come on ye dn\Vli.'' And Bridget, utterly ignoring Elfie's indignant glance, stood up in readiness to receive her visitor.	There was a moment's hesitation. Then Brian, taking his coucage in his hands, manfully stumped down the stairs and stood before them.	"Tell me what I've done?" He looked very fine and splendid and manly, Bridget thought, and so did Elfie. But she was still implacable."I'm busy,' she said, "and have no time to talk to you."	Bridget, in spite of her indignation, was seized with such a strong desire to laugh that she was obliged to bury her face in a green baize bag which usually housed the best silver teapot.	"What have I done ?" he repeated. A masterful note had crept into his voice, which impressed and thrilled Elfie in a rather delicious way.She wavered.	He saw it, and seized his opportunity. Taking the sugarbasin from her hands, he dragged her to her feet. "Come on, Elfie. It's getting late. We shall miss our tea. There's a jolly fire for the chestnuts, and I've got a new book about fairies. I bought it for you with my Saturday's money . ..........He paused, while this delightful and alluring picture of enjoyment ahead to he seized for the grasping filtered slowly in. Then he added softly, "Whatever I've done or said to offend you-I'm sorry, Elfie. . T didn't mean it. I-I like you ton much."It was a handsome apology.	"I'll come," she said, her anger melting away like snow beneath a hot sun. The chestnuts and fairy-book she could have resisted. Brian's saying: "I like you too much," she couldn't. Her mouth might stretch from ear to ear, she might resemble a cod; yet he liked her. Her cup of happiness was fullCHAPTER IVIN WHICH ELFIE MAKES THE ACQUAINTANCE OF ONEHR. BONNETIT was about this period of Elfie's career that a crisis aroseone day in the Charrington household, and Mrs. Charrington42	AN	UNDRESSED HEROINEretired to bed. It has been mentioned before that it was Mrs. Charrington's habit to retire to her bed during all crises.	Her bedroom was away op at the very top of the house. A charming bedroom, too, notwithstanding its worn carpet, which once had been a pretty blue of artistic pattern, and its chipped blue toilet ware ; because it was so full of sunshine and warmth, and the view of the river and island from its two windows was even more enchanting than from the drawing-room below-simply because one could see further.	Not that a view affected Mrs. Charrington much one way or another, and she didn't like rivers. But she did like the sun, and she did like being away up at the top of the house with forty-four stairs between her and Bridget and a crisis in the shape of a rude, persistent man, who, after presenting a paper to her, had firmly seated himself on a chair in the hall and refused to move. And, of course, if he wouldn't move, there was nothing more to be said or done. Major Charrington was up in London, Elfie was at school, Bridget had flounced down to the kitchen with hard mutterings beneath her breath when the man had, in loud, clear tones, stated first his business and then his intention of remaining seated on the ball chair for an indefinite period; so she, Mrs. Charrington, might just as well go to bed, which was wai m and comfortable, as remain downstairs; and finish her last novel from Welcock's library on the Hill. Not daring to ask Bridget, as she was so "flouncy" and put about, to fill her hot-water bottle, Mrs. Charrington went to the bath-room and filled it herself. The water was not really hot, and this annoyed her. Everything for her and in her life seemed to go wrong, even to hot-water bottles. Other people's hot-water bottles, she was sure, were boiling, because other people could afford good kitchen fires, and didn't use horrid things like cinders and coke for "backing" purposes.	Tnjuredly and laboriously she toiled up the long flight of stairs. They tried her, for she was far from being a robust woman, but she was grateful to them. Once she had reached her own room, and her laboured breath had calmed down and her tired legs had ceased to ache, a pleasant sensation of safety, of immunity from all things unpleasant, laid hold of her and, undressing, she crept into bed, arranged a pretty and becoming wrapper around her shoulders, placed her feet against a tepid hot-water bottle, and was soon immersed in her hook.	Reading was the only thing Mrs. Charrington now really enjoyed. She was not a happy woman, and was a bitterly disappointed one. She was not happy, because she was selfish and was "getting on". She had not boen young when she married-good looks and smart clothes are not in them-S N		U N I)	. S F I'	lIE Ii 01 N I.	43	ICes sultieieiit to attract nail. She had always been seilisli:id could never conceal it. Men detest selfishness in women		much as women detest cowardice in men. A sprainedoilde, in the first instance, had done more towards attracting)lajor Charrington to her side than her handsome face. Theywere at a picnic. She succeeded in detaching him from the restol the party. Their environment was romantic. Then camethe sprained ankle. Only a slight one, but useful for herpurpose. She was very patient and sweet, and looked up atthe Major with big grave eyes. She wore a pale-green gown andlarge white hat which became her well.	She had turned thirty-eight, but in certain lights looked twenty-eight.	She begged the Major to leave her. She did not want to spoil his fun . . . . But if before he went he could dip her handkerchief into some stream so that she could bandage the injured ankle . . . (She spoke as though India overflowed with little cool streams and brooks.)He fell in love with her straight away.A couple of months later they were married.	She cared for him no more than she cared for any other man or woman. She had no room in her heart for anyone but herself. But she wanted to be married, and she was attracted by his money and position. Her long "man hunt" would be at an end. Now she would have time for other things.	When the Major had retired from the Service at a comparatively early age after a sunstroke, which left him for a time with defective memory, and they settled down in Richmond, she refused to know people. They could not entertain. She could not dress as she had been accustomed tolres5. They could not afford cabs to dinner. She was not going In trudge about at night with an old evening gown pinned up around her waist, and hideous lumpy snow-shoes over hr slippers."If we're poor, we'll be poor and grin and bear it," she had with tightly drawn lips. "I've got my books-"''And ElSe," the Major had interposed heatedly."And ElSe, if you like," she returned with a little smile atis warmth. "At any rate, you've got ElSe.""And thank God for it," he said devoutly.	So she settled down to her novel reading, and "grinning :0(1 hearing" things. She did not quarrel with her husband, -lie was not precisely bad-tempered. When she complained '-lie did so in a gentle ladylike manner, and she was aggrieved, '-iveetly, patiently, but chronically ; and as the years advancedlore and more she withdrew to her pleasant bedroom, awayrom unpleasant things and crises, like rude men who came.1 id sal :e hail chairs and refused to go away.	44	AN UNDRESSED HEROINELI	Rifle stood at the loot of the bed, flushed with racing up the stairs, and excited."There's a gentleman in the drawing-room, Mother.'	"A gentleman in the (hawing-room I" Mrs. Charrington raised herself with an elbow against the pillows and looked at Rifle. "Oh, who is it ?""I don't know. I thought you would."	"No, I don't. Bridget didn't tell me." Mrs. Charrington in no way connected "the gentleman in the thawing-room" with the rude man in the hall."He's small and fat, and has a black moustache."	"Oh I" said Mrs. Charrington. She fell back against her pillows and closed her eyes. To have the rude man thrust upon her thus when she was trying to forget him was a little hard to bear.	"Are you poorly I" The child always put this question with grave politeness to her mother. If she were poorly, it behoved her, Rifle, to do something to try to alleviate the poorliness. Her father had said she must always try to be kind and attentive to her mother when she had a headache or a cold, or was tired and "took" to her bed. Major Charrlngton's conscience was never at rest about his own shortcomings towards his wife and child. It nagged at him cruelly, like the nagging of a decayed tooth, during the intervalsand sometimes they were quite long intervals-between his lapses from the path of sobriety, and he was then all that a husband and father could be.	So Rifle had been trained to be attentive and polite to her mother. With childish perspicacity she'd long ago discovered that when her mother went to bed it did not mean necessarily she was ill. She knew that she was not ill this afternoon, yet she put the question.	Mrs. Charrington yawoed. "I'm not exactly poorly, darling, but I was tired and a little headachy and cold, and thought I was best out of the draughts.""And what about the gentleman in the drawing-room ?"	"He must just stay there," Mrs. Charrington gave a disdainful shrug of her shoulders, "till Father comes in.""Don't you know him ?""No."	"But isn't it rather rude, Mother, to leave him there all alone ?"	"Not at all; and don't ask so many worrying questions, RIfle." cried Mrs. Charrington, pettishly. "Go away now andAN UNDItESSEJ) IIEIZOTNE	45shut the door. Oh, and tell Bridget to make some hot buttered toast for my tea, it will cheer me up."	Elfie went slowly out of the room and down the stairs to the drawing-room. She stood outside the door debatingly. She felt sorry for the poor gentleman sitting inside alone. It seemed so rude, so discourteous that he should be there unentertained, and for, apparently, an indefinite period. Her father might not be in till late . . . . Summoning up her courage, she softly opened the door and entered.	The gentleman was reclining in an armchair in front of the fire, with his short podgy legs stuck straight out in front of him. His eyes were closed, he had not heard Elfie come in, and she was not sure, if he were asleep, if she ought to wake him. She gave a slight cough, and he opened his eyes at once."Oh-good afternoon," she said.	He returned her greeting and examined her judicially. She wore a very short brown frock, which made her thin brown legs appear longer than they were, and her soft curly hair, which had escaped its ribbon, hung about her face in an untidy but fascinating cloud. In her eyes was the half-shy, half-eager expression they always wore when she was confronted by strangers, an expression that seemed to say: "I don't know you, I'm a little nervous of you, but-I'd like to know all about you."	The gentleman, whose name was Bonnet, waited for her to make the next observation, but he sat up straighter in his chair and drew in his stumpy legs, placing his feet neatly side by side on the hearthrug.	"I'm sorry my mother is poorly," said Elfie, "and can't be with you."	"Oh, don't mention it," replied Mr. Bonnet. "I'm used to being alone."	"Are you ?" said Elfie. She sat down on a chair opposite to him and crossed her legs."Have you been here long ?"	"Not very. I was in the hall first, but I was cold, so I ventured up here, there was nobody about."	"In the hall I" FIfe considered this. It seemed very impolite to have left a stranger and a visitor in the hall. She wondered if Bridget had been the offender."You came to see my father ?"	"Well, not exactly." Mr. Bonnet grinned. "1 came to see anybody. Tt's my business, but nobody ever wants to see me. It's rather depressin' at times, knowin' nobody ever wants you." He sighed heavily.	"I'm sure it must be." Elf e felt very sorry for the gentleman and also deeply perplexed. He spoke in riddles. He came on business, therefore it must be her father he wanted to see,46	AN UNDRESSES) HEROINEyet he said "anybody would do". Would 'anybody" include herself	She put the question to him Could he state his business to her.	The gentleman appeared immensely amused. He laughed immoderately. Elfie, pleased that he showed signs of cheering up, laughed too, and was not a whit offended when he explained that "anybody" meant grown-up people, and not little girls who only understood dolls and "such-like things". Of course, she understood and knew about thousands of things, but seeing he was a juan, and probably incapable of comprehension, it was no good pointing this out.	They chatted pleasantly for a while on many topics, then, fearing lie was being insufficiently entertained, for, after all, what is mere conversation ? she offered to play the piano for him.	"My new piece,'' she explained. "It is very pretty, and when nobody's about, I mean nobody that matters-like governesses," she quickly added, fearing she might have hurt Mr. Bonnet's feelings (she had now learned his name), "I use the loud and soft pedals. Pedals make such a difference."Seating herself at the piano, she pulled her brief skirt asmuch over her knees as possible to cover a hole in her right 1stocking, and started on ''Cujus Animam'' with great feeling. The pedals somewhat bothered her, the music-stool was high, and they were almost out of her reach, but by leaning well forward and stretching her legs to their utmost, she succeeded first in securing the right and then the left, and once found she did not let go. The effect achieved was very fine, and Mr. Bonnet was sensibly impressed, and their acquaintance rapidly ripened into warm friendship.	Suddenly she remembered she had not given Bridget her mother's message about the toast, and thinking of toast caused her to feel hungry herself. Usually on her mother's days in bed and when her father was out she took tea with Bridget in the kitchen, but this afternoon ought she not to have it in the drawing-room and invite the gentleman to partake of it P Asking to be excused, she slipped out of the room and down to the kitchen.	Bridget was ironing, and it seemed to Elfie she was making an unnecessary banging noise, bringing the iron down on to the board as though she were trying to break it up for firewood. Amidst the bangs Elfie voiced her request, and quite jumped when Bridget gave vent to a loud ironic laugh by way of reply."Tea for a bailiff Good gracious me, Miss Elfie,"	"A what!" Elfie had heard the word, but did not comprehend its meaning."A man who's come to collect money and won't clear out\ N		IT N if U U S	U	it U if 0 I N ii	47till he's got it--the varmiur. Oh, Miss Elite dear, it was a had day for Bridget Malony when she took a place in this timily, but it would be a worse one for her and the family too, though I says it meself, if she was to leave it. But this	ame . . . it nearly breaks me heart; and the poor, dear ,Major . . . . And you too, darlint." Bridget, suddenly dissolving into tears, seized Elfie in her arms, and covered her with kisses.	Amazed, struggling, Elfie pushed her away and asked her what she meant. "What money ? What for?" she demanded, whilst her small face quivered. 'Money we oweAnd he won't go till he gets it ? He'll always stay here, and if Father doesn't pay, will he be locked up ? Oh, BridgetPassionately she now seized the servant by the arm and shook it. "Tell me quickly, Bridget. Will Father go to prison if lie doesn't pay ? Oh, it's terrible, terrible I And that man sitting there I Can't we get him away before Father comesIt will be such a shock to him. Oh! Oh!" Wringing her hands, she dropped into a Windsor chair and buried her face in her handkerchief. She was not weeping, but her small frame shook from head to foot. Her father, could he have seen her, would have been very sorry for his little Elfie and bitterly ashamed. But he never knew the extent of her suffering that afternoon. With the instinct so deeply engralned in her that she must shield him from all trouble, she never let him know what she had passed through before Mr. Bonnet was ejected from the house.	"I am going out," she told Bridget presently. "1 want to try and think what's best to be done, and my thoughts always come best by the river."	Bridget demurred. The child must have her tea be looked that white. . , . But Elfie had flown.	Seizing her hat and coat, which hung in the hall, she darted out of the house. She had a dreadful feeling that Mr. Bonnet would try to stop her if he knew that she was going to warn her father of his obnoxious presence in the house. She did not know what would he gained thereby, but she was sure he ought to be warned. She would take up a position at the foot of the Terrace steps and wait for him till he came. And supposing he was suffering from a "giddy attack ...........Elfie's cheeks went whiter at the very thought. He would lie in the little room at the hack and Mr. Bonnet would sit on and on in the drawing-room, stretching out his stumpy legs to the fire, refusing to go, glued to his seat like the ugly little48	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEBuddha god in the Ingleby's library. With her hands pressed to her eyes to shut out the desolating vision of a perpetual Mr. Bonnet, she descended the steps to the river, and walked straight into Mrs. Ingleby, who was crossing the end of Friar's Lane.	"Hallo, Elfie !" cried the lady cheerfully. 'Look where you're going. You'll be tumbling into the river some day if you walk about playing at blind man's buff with yourself." She stopped. The child's eyes, now raised to hers, were so hill of deep trouble that she saw at once something serious was the matter. "What is it, Elfie ?" she asked. 'What is the	matter ?''	"Something dreadful-a man 	Elfie broke off."Oh, I can't tell you." She never spoke of her parents' affairsor misfortunes to anyone. It would have been disloyal toher father, She was also too proud.	"But win', darling? Perhaps I could help you." Mrs. Ingleby took Elfie's cold little hand in hers and chafed it tenderly. "Why can't you tell me"It wouldn't be fair to Father.''	"It might he much fairer and kinder to him it you told me than if you didn't tell me, for perhaps I could help you and him, and I can't help you if I don' know,"	"I wonder," said ElSe, and then because she was overstrained and wanted her tea, and Mr. Bonnet in the drawingroom had assumed the proportions of a gigantic and evil monster, she felt she could not bear it alone, and out it all came in a wild whirl of words, and from the incoherent jumble Mrs. Ingleby gradually arrived at the truth.	"You poor little thing,'' she said, when Elfie had finished, and she took her into her kind arms and held her closely for a moment. Then, in a strong-made-up-her-mind voice which gave ElSe instant courage, she cried "We'll tackle this Mr. Bonnet-you and I, and we'll get him out of the house before your father returns. Lead the way, and go quietly. Your mother in her bed" (Mrs. Charrington might have winced could she have heard the stinging irony of time words) "must not be permitted to hear what is going on. It might upset her, poor dear."	On tiptoe ElSe led the way along the Terrace to the house. Fortunately she had left the door open, and they crept through the hall and up the stairs to the drawing-room. Now that there was somebody strong and kind to support her ElSe's spirits were rising, and she found herself thinking they were like two conspirators in the Gunpowder Plot, which had been the subject of her history lesson that day. Mrs. Ingleby noticed how dusty were the stairs. Bridget was an excellent servant, but she found it difficult at times to get through alla a i a n < 1.				S 11 1) ii P. IL 0 I N F			.19thu \1/4'(l a iigle-handcd, and Mrs. Charrington required a lot of waiting upon.	I should drink, too,'' thought Mrs. Ingleby, "if 1 were the poor man. What a comfortless house	The clra;ving-rooni as they entered was filled with the late afternoon sunshine and the reflection of the moving river quivered along the white frieze. The room, though shabby, like the rest of the house, was pretty in its colour schememaize-coloured walls and hangings, with blue Oriental rugs on a dark-stained floor.	Mr. Bonnet still occupied the armchair in front of the fire, and his dark, smooth, plastered-with-grease head reposed against a yellow silken cushion, His days of'' 'ssesion'' in other people's houses were not usually spent in such pleasant places. As a rule lie sat in chills- dining-rooms, kitchens, or halls, and received black looks. Here on his entrance the women had fled, he sat where lie liked, and a nice little girl entertained him with bright conversation and moving music. The warm fire, the unexpected sunshine-for the morning had been (lark and stormy-which flooded the room had insensibly raised his spirits. He decided to smoke a cigarette and follow it with a little nap which would strengthen him for the fray when the master of the house returned, ''There'll be a shincly,'' lie thought. ''These Arm)' chaps know how' to use a bit of language, and this chap lifts the elbow, I'm told,"	He had arrived at the napping stage when Mrs. Ingleby and Elfie entered. His mouth was wide open and Ins strongly expelled breath blew out his cheeks and fluttered his- long moustache. He NN-as not a pretty sight, and his prone figure moved Mrs. Inglebv to instant and angry action.	''Mr. Bonnet,'' she cried so loudly-forgetting Mrs. Charrington overhead-that in' leapt to his feet with such alacrity that he nearly toppled into the fireplace.''How much is your account ?'' she demanded fiercely.	''twenty pounds, nma'am.'' He was hurt at her tone, her abruptness, and resented her waking him from his pleasant sleep, but lie recognized she was a'' lady'' and would stand no familiarity, and the ''Ma'am'' sprang to his lips.''Show it to me.' -	''The servant has it, I believe. The lady threw it on to the floor,"''Is the debt one of Major Charrington's ?''''Yes, nma'ain.''''Then the account should have been handed to him.''	''It doesn't matter so long as I've got a footing in the house,'' Mr. Bonnet realized the lads' really knew nothing \vhalever about dthts and hnilifls and the form of procedure50	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEto be taken by the 'man in possession", and that she was only bluffing.'Can anyone-an outsider settle the debt ?"	'I never refuse money," said Mr. Bonnet, with a sly wink. Now he, began to feel cheerful. He could have staked his last shilling the debt would be discharged within half-an-hours time, which would enable him to have tea at home with his wife and family, and bloaters.	Mrs. Ingleby drew a purse from her pocket. She was about the only woman in Surrey who'd refused to yield lip her pocket, for she was a busy woman who required one for all sorts of odds and ends connected with her busy life, and she detested bags.I have not sufficient here," she said.Mr. Bonnet coughed deferentially behind his hand.'I must go home for it.''Mr. Bonnet said nothing, his disappointment was great.Home'' might he anywhere : Twickenham, Kew, East	Sheen 	His own home and bloaters were receding rapidly.	''1 shan't be long," said Mrs. Ingleby. "I live at Cholminideley Court."	Cholmondeley Court! Mr. Bonnet's breathing quickened. The finest house in Richmond He bowed so low that Elfic feared lie would never recover himself, and she was ready to lend a helping hand if the rug on which he was standing should slniot from beneath his feet or precipitate him on to tho polished floor.	Mrs. Inglehy hurried towards the door. On the threshold she paused. "I suppose you can't come with me and-and nil the house of your presence before Major Charningtoii returns ?''NN	o, ma'am." Mr. Bonnet was again hurt. "Rid the house of his presence!" She spoke as though he were an obnoxious hit of vermin. He couldn't help being there. It was not his fault that he was there, he didn't want to he. He wanted to be at home eating bloaters with Mrs. Bonnet and the little Bonnets. His resentment was so deep that it gradually boiled over with anger. This handsome, blackhrowed lady might live at Cholmondeley Court, but she was not going to browbeat him-Mr. Bonnet. "If I went with you, how am I to know as you're not in league with the family and just decoyin' me away ? My instructions are 'Don't quit till you've got the money.' A nice mess I should be in if you was to get me out and then shut the door. \Vliern should I he, I should like to know ?"	"Outside, I suppose," said Mrs. Ingleby laconically, as she walked away and down the stairs, and Elfie hugged hers-11 delightedly but without daring to smile.AN	UNL)JtESSEJ)		iiE1CUNE	51Iv	He, Mr. Bonnet, continued to be w'rathfu], and this wrathhe ventured upon the little girl before him. He forgot thatnot half an hour ago he'd quite liked Elfie, who'd been sokind in her efforts to entertain him. He was deeply offended,and his inside was a void-it was long past his usual tea-time.		'Rid the house of my presence,' "he cried in high dudgeon.He stood on the hearthrug with his back to the fire, andElfie now observed his legs formed a curve like the GothicArchway in Old Palace Yard. "Spoke as though I were acockr,.ch or a militant Suffragette And it's your Pa's faultas I'm here and not mine. I don't want to be here. I don'tlike the room to start with." (Mr. Bonnet didn't know hewas telling an untruth, he'd temporarily lost all sense of valuesthrough temper.) "The wall-paper's depressin'. I like paperswith flowers on. And as for that river there"-indignant ly helooked through the window-"just fiowin', fiowin', fiowin'-it'sgetting on my nerves. I should commit suicide if I lived here.I know I should. It's quite depressin' enough always beingwhere I'm not wanted without having a bloomin' riverthrown in."	Elfie said nothing. She was waiting for his anger to pass. She wanted to put a question to him, an urgent question. She sat down on a high oak settle and placed a yellow cushion behind her back. More than ever she resembled a little brown moth. She examined Mr. Bonnet with concentrated interest. A lock of his sleek, black hair had become disarranged and stood away from his head like a fluttering pennant. It waved about in the air when his gesticulations became violent; and his knees, which in calmer moments he succeeded in drawing in almost to a semblance of straightness, became more and more Gothic. Irrelevantly, Elfie found herself debating how they looked when hp said his prayers.	Presently he resumed his seat in the armchair and the storm died down to little mutterings and grumblings. Then RIfle put her question:	"If your bill were not paid, Mr. Bonnet, how long would you stay here ?""Always,' he replied succinctly	She started. What a mercy. what a uoixderlul mercy, her encounter with Mrs. Ingleby had been I A Mr. Bonnet always there, always seated in the armchair ! She shuddered at the very thought.''That is to say, in reason, Then, I should sell the turnilure."'Our furniture ''' She gazed at him in horror52	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEHe nodded.AE 01 it?'	'Practi"atly alt ol this," tie surveyed the contents ot the room with deep disdain, 'because it's poor, cheap stuff, and then I doubt if it would cover what's owin', another room or two would have to be thrown in."'And the piano ?" Elfle held her breath.	"Yes. Might fetch a pound or two, case not bad-walnut, a bit wormy, though.""And what about my practising ?" demanded Elfie.	"People who can't pay their bills shouldn't have little girls a-learnin' music.''	'Oh !" said Elfie : and suddenly she knew he was right, and a dreadful shame swept over her afresh. She shouldn't be learning music or dancing or-or have jam for tea or a penny ever)' Saturday or a birthday present from her father. It was wrong. It was wicked.	"What," she asked falteringly, "what does Father owe the money for ?-	"Your frock and shoes and stockin's." Mr. Bonnet, to do him justice, felt a little ashamed at the brutality of his own words when he saw her wince as though struck by a whip, and he would have recalled them if he could.	"Not yours alone, your Ma's too. It's a draper's account -Ducklin's	"Ducklings V Elfie's misery was overwhelming her. She'd not felt so unhappy since the codfish episode. Duckling's I Her dear Duckling's at the corner of George Street I Duckling's, with the pretty, polite young ladies behind the lace and ribbon and blouse counters, and the kind gentleman with the white hair who, with the beautiful and dignified manners of a bishop, led you to gloves or haberdashery, and made you feel, though only expending a penny on darning wool, that the shop was not only enriched by your purchase but honoured by your presence.	"And they will all know,' thought Elfie, ''the lovely tall gentleman and the nice 'fancy button' lady, and I shall never dare go in the shop again, never, never."	"They've been very patient, too," remarked Mr. Bonnet ruminatively; "three years it's been owin' and not a penny on account.''	"Three whole years!" Elfie's cup was full to the brim now and running over. For three whole years while she'd been innocently shopping there for her mother-the purchases had been small, certainly, and had been paid for with cash down(chiefly pennies)-the whole of Duckling's had known that herfamily was owing the firm twenty pounds. It was unthinkable, almost unbelievable.\N		UNI)I,55J:D	It 1:IzoiNL	53	She got up from her seat and wandered a little aimlessly to the window. She could not bear Mr. Bonnet's eyes upon her; his loose "sticky-up" lock of hair and short bow legs nauseated her. She was faint for something to eat, but she did not know it. Bridget, away below in the basement kitchen, imagined, as Elfie had not been down for her tea, that she must be out with Brian.	Mrs. Charrington, when her tea had been taken up, had made no reference to the ¥ non-appearance of hot buttered toast. She saw that Bridget was still put out, and believed that though the message had been delivered to her-and Rifle rarely forgot a message-Bridget had curtly refused to make it; so to avoid ructions she did not press the point.	Gloomily (and hungrily) Elfie awaited Mrs. Ingleby's return. She was a long time. Couldn't she get the twenty pounds? Possibly not. The Inglebys were rich and lived in the loveliest old house in Richmond, and how Elfie adored and admired the fine old historic place Major Chnrrington alone knew, huttwenty pounds was a frightful lot of money, an immense sum; Elfie could scarcely visualize the appearance of twenty golden sovereigns spread out upon a table, the very thought of it took her breath away. And if the money were not forthcoming Mr. Bonnet would remain seated there for an indefinite period (Elfie wondered if it would be about a year) and then sell their furniture. There was an oak chest which Rifle loved, quite a small affair, but beautifully carved, placed to the right of one of the windows, on which she now curled herself. It commanded one of her favourite bits of the river. Would that go, too? Be sold to someone who would not understand and appreciate its carving of quaint and fabulous figures, around whom she had woven many interesting and exciting stories, many of which she had confided to her father! There was Mr. Pinchbeck-the tall, thin man with a square face and two legs like the drumsticks of an old fowl; and the woman with a third eye in the middle of her forehead, and square chunks of hair resembling the hair of Egyptian Kings in her Ancient History book. Elfie had christened her Gorgonzola Jane, and when Major Charrington had inquired, "Why Gorgonzola ?" she explained that the lady, being the possessor of an odd eye, somehow made her think of the Gorgons in Heathen Mythology, why she couldn't say.	Tenderly now, with small cold fingers, she caressed Gorgonzola's middle optic and hoped and prayed that she would not be tom from her by a cruel Mr. Bonnet.	"She might go to someone who did not love and understand her-poor darling-and who would not know that some day she was going to marry Mr. Pinchbeck, and her third eye blossom into a rose- Ah I" Her own quick eyes had descried54	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEMrs. Ingleby coming along the Terrace. Joyfully, and in movement resembling a darting sand shrimp, she descended the stairs to open the door.	Five minutes later Mr. Bonnet had departed and Gorgonzola Jane was saved.CHAPTER VWHICH RELATES HOW ELFIE SAVED MR. AND MRS. DOBBSFROM GOING TO THE WORKHOUSEIT was in the spring of the following year, when Elfie was eleven, that her natural bent for poetry (which she was cultivating must sedulously) was the means of saving Mr. and Mrs. Dobbs from putting up the shutters of their little shop-and bankruptcy.	Business had been bad with Mr. Dobbs for many months. Trade had been getting less and less. Mr. Chrisp's gorgeous fish shop on Hill Rise, and the new one at the corner of George Street opposite to Ducklings-which corner was quite the busiest and most exciting spot in Richmond (for it was here that carts and vans collided, also muddy-wheeled perambulators and irate pedestrians, and people and dogs were impartially run over)-were gradually absorbing all the custom of the town; and the orders to Mr. Dobbs, or one should say purchasers at Mr. Dobbs', for most of Mr. Dobbs's customers carried away their own fish, became fewer and skimpier.	People, even the poor people who support each other so loyally, could not see the force of buying a pair of kippers down Brewers Lane, where there was no form of entertainnent -no collisions or deaths by violence or boys shot from bicycles -and where they had to carry their purchases away wrapped in newspaper, when they could buy their kippers equally cheaply at Chrisp's on Hill Rise, or at the new shop at the corner, and have all the above-mentioned entertainment thrown in free, in addition to brown paper instead of newspaper as an outer covering for their parcel.	Mr. Dobbs confided his trouble to Elfie one afternoon. She was returning from school with a satchel of books slung over her shoulder, and he, filling the entire doorway with his vast bulk, was gazing reproachfully at Bert, the boy at the newspaper shop opposite, who with a bucket of water, a leather, and an absorbing interest in the passers-by, wasAN UNDI(ESSEI) HEROINE	55engaged in not cleaning the window. Mr. Dobbs was telling himself that he was glad Bert belonged to Mrs. Prebble, the newspaper shop proprietress, and not to him, and that if he had belonged to him he should now be administering to the boy's red head a good clout with his own wet leather.	Rifle, coming along the Lane, distracted his attention from Bert's delinquencies, and also aroused his curiosity ; for, strange to relate, the little girl was proceeding slowly and walked with a preoccupied air. When before had he seen her not darting along like a swallow; indeed, when before had he ever seen her walk	She stopped on perceiving him in the doorway and gave him a polite "Good afternoon"."Aren't you well, Miss Elfie ?" he inquired."Yes; why, Mr. Dobbs ?""You are not running."	"I was thinking, thinking very hard. I'm making poetry -a new piece. Can you think of a word to rhyme with dolphin, Mr. Dobbs ?" She leant against the lintel of the door, and, looking over and above his egg-shaped outline, interrogated him with earnest eyes.	He thought. "No," he said after awhile. "I've no head for that sort of thing. Indeed, I'm beginning to think I've no head for anything. Only this morning Mrs. Dobbs remarked I was all body, just like a hippo., and nothing else; and I believe she's right, or I shouldn't be where I am."	"Wouldn't be where you are ?" RUle refrained from saying that if he had been a hippo he wouldn't be standing in his doorway in Richmond, but in a nice round pond at the Zoo. "How do you mean ?""I'm a failure, Miss RIfle." He sighed heavily.	"Oh I" Her interest was kindled. Mr. Dobbs had called himself many things in his time, but never this. "A failure", moreover, she had not met before-at least, not to her knowledge. It sounded something darkly romantic, something sinister, and in some way associated with suicide, revolvers, and flinging oneself from windows or bridges into a river. She wondered if Mr. Dobbs would ever hurl himself over Richmond Bridge if his failure became more intense. She hoped not, and that if he did, Mr. Winks, the waterman, would be at hand. All this she thought while Mr. Dobbs again sighed violently, for her brain moved rapidly."Why are you a failure ?" she ventured at length.	"Because my business is going to the dogs that proves it. I can't manage to make enough to keep just my wife and myself, and we are living that plainly-nothing for our tea but a bit of our own fish, perhaps, that's likely to be left and go had-and stout once a week, on Sundays. Her aAN	UNT)1z.F:ssEl) liERorNi:good manager, too, and it breaks my heart, Miss Elfie, not to give her all she wants since little Nell died ; and she so fond of a bit of tripe with her supper, and never gets it, 'cos she says we can't afford it. Doesn't that prove it-prove I'm a failure, Miss Elfie, if Mrs. Dobbs can't have tripe with her supper ?" He looked down at Elfie with compelling gloom"Perhaps," she admitted.	'So there it is. The shutters will be going up if things don't improve.""The shutters he going up 1'	'Yes, my bit of capital won't last for ever. It ain't the day of miracles, and then-"'Yes ?" RIfle's eyes were riveted on him.	'Well, it'll be the workhouse for Mrs. Dobbs and me. But wiry I should he bothering you with this, Miss Fifle, I don't know, but I feel weak-like. Mrs. Dobbs doesn't even know the worst. 1 can't break it to her. I . . . Our little home	and the little shop 	Mr. Dobbs paused and blew his	nose violently.Elfie looked away. She was inexpressibly touched.	That a man, and a large heavy man, too, should have tears in his eyes "A failure" was a worse thing than even she had imagined. Tears in one's eyes (if the eyes belonged to a man) was certainly worse than suicide from Richmond Bridge, even without a life-saving Mr. Winks. She felt something must be done, and immediately. She begged Mr. Dobbs to tell her all, and explain how such a condition of affairs had arisen.	And he did. Of the competition of the new shop at the corner of George Street, of the gorgeousness of its get-up, of the strength of the salesmen's lungs who advertised its wares.	"And the passers-by hear them, they stop and listen, Miss RIfle. They can't help it, because 'uman nature is curious. They hear six pounds of turbot is going to Ingleby, Cholmondeley Court, and they are drawn in, they walk into the net without knowing it. If the turbot there is good enough for Cholmondeley Court it's good enough for them; or if people like the be Traffords on the Terrace are not above eating hake steaks-well, they'll eat hake steaks. It's advertisin' that does it ; and show. And then there's Chrisp on the Hill, with his blocks of ice as big as a battleship and his asperdistrasis like palms at Harvest Festivals. Side I call it -notldn' but side. Those asperdistrasis just make me tired."	"You mean," said RIfle, "it's making the shops look nice that attracts customers ?" She was enthralled with the subject-her thoughts were moving at such a rate she almost felt dizzy.Mr. Dobbs admitted this was the case."Well, then, why don't you ?"AN	tiN000SSNi> UFlo1Ni		57	''It's the 01011ev, he said; loriiioeiiiaiio;i sue!; Ice and ferns cost money, and the space is so limited. How can you,'' he eyed his slab gloomily, 'make that look attractive ?''	''I know,' agreed ERie, ''it must he difficult. It's very small; but-there must be other ways-' Her fertile brain had already hit upon an idea, and though onlating with excitement, outwardly she remained calm.''Other ways. You mean of attracting custom ?'Elfie nodded.	''1 can't stand and bellow like a bull-though I'm big, my voice isn't particularly strong. Besides, I couldn't stoop to it, Mrs. Dobbs and I have always kept ourselves respectable, we're the old-fashioned sort and 1 couldn't bring myself to stand and roar-"	''I didn't mean that,'' she interrupted. ''Mr. DThbs, I've got an idea. It isn't quite my own-the furniture shop down Paved Court put it into my head it was a mattress-I saw it the other day-and above it was written on a card : 'Even honest people lie on inc.' Wasn't it splendid ? Now that would just do for your fish." Her eyes were dancing with excitement,Mr. Dobbs scratched his head.	''I don't mean those words, of course, but something appropriate, something that would make people stop and read it,""What sort of thing P'	''Ah, that's it. I must think something out. Isn't it a lovely idea 1'''I don't know,'' said Mr. Dobbs carefully.	"But it is,'' said Elfie, "if I can think of some nice words. I must go and (10 it now. I've got some paper and a pencil." She was searching in her satchel. "I'll go and sit by the river. I can always make poetry best there,''	Poetry So it was to be poetry Mr. Dobbs watched her away across the Green. On his round fat shiny face was an expression of slight awe. Poetry about his fish I To serve as an advertisement for his fish l To attract people to buy his fish I What could she say ? What was there to he saidCould a poem he written about a kipper P No, Mr. Dobbs felt convinced it couldn't. He knew one or two poems. Years ago he'd learnt them at school. One had been called "The Wreck of the Royal George". The sea certainly had been introduced into the poem, but the sea, though salt, was not a kipper.	''No,'' he said emphatically, retreating backward from the (loorlvay into his shop. (Mr. Dobbs was a careful man he Illade no attempt at a turning movement in his doorway, the structure of the premises being frail through age.) "It cannot he (lone. Hot if it could he done, she'll do it.''AN UNDRESSED HEROINEU	Elfie, seated on her favourite bench beneath a chestnut whose leaves were uncurling in the warm Spring sunshine like the first unfolding of a baby's crumpled hand, had composed four lines on a whiting by the end of half an hour, wbich ran as follows'I'm only a little whitingBut 0. so very nice!You can only eat me once,Though you'll want to eat me twice"Then, hearing five o'clock strike at the Marist Convent across the river, she went home to tea. She found her father alone in the dining-room. Mrs. Charrington had gone on one of her rare visits to a friend who lived in Queen's Road, a Mrs. Arkwright, whose daughter, Rosamond, went to the same school as Elfie.	The Major and Elfie loved having their tea alone together. They never expressed this in so many words, it would have been disloyal to "Mother", but the pleasure was there; and Bridget spoilt them on these occasions by giving them real Irish potato-cakes.	Elfie poured out with becoming gravity, her determination making up for what she lacked in strength (her hands being unusually small for her age) in grappling with the old-fashioned Britannia metal teapot-the best silver teapot only came out of Its baize bag on Sundays. Her father waited on her with great deference, always knowing the exact moment when her plate behind the blue willow-patterned tea-cosy was empty. It made her feel deliciously important and grown-up. Their topics of conversation were varied and of extreme interest to both. The bank of celandincs, which hugged the little stream running by the side of the Old Deer Park, was a mass of yellow, the Major announced the celandines were out. So Spring really had come. And the willows	"I know," interrupted Elfie. "I noticed. They've just rushed out since the rain You said they would. Look at the darling at the end.'' They both craned their heads towards the window and the willows on the Beloved Isle.	'I saw," said the Major, "Mr. Winks and the widow. They were on the seat as usual in front of Qucensbury House.""Oh I" said RIfle. "Were they speaking ?"	"No," said the Major, "but-they were sitting little closer, perhaps a couple of inches.'.\N		i.XfliI,bi1)	ILR(TNU	59	Elfic was very imp(csscG. Sir. Winks, the waterman, and the widow were an intense source of interest to her and the Major, for they were courting. They knew Mr. Winks well-in fact, intimately-but they did not as yet know the widow. Mr. Winks was, to Elfie, one of the most interesting and romantic figures on the river. He had round, stooping shoulders, a pointed beard, longish hair at the back, which turned up with a suspicion of curl against a red and blue check muffler, keen blue eyes, and, lastly, gold rings in his ears. It was the gold ear-rings which gave Elfie the delicious and thrilling sensation that some day lie might turn into a pirate, a buccaneer, and set forth on the high seas to plunder somebody or other even if there were no Spaniards about. Her father had read her many stories of adventure, and Captain Black was one of her favourite characters in fiction. (John Silver ran him a good second.) So, till lUr. Winks started on an adventurous career, she interested herself in his courtship, which was a peculiar one.	Each evening, wet or line, lie led the widow to an octagonal bench on the towing-path, surrounding the thick trunk of a chestnut tree. There lie placed her on the side of the bench which had its back to the river, and which faced a tall privet hedge and railing surrounding the grounds of a domain adjoining Cholmondeley Court, called Queensbury House. Himself he placed two feet away. Then, without speaking, they steadfastly gazed at the privet hedge. This had been going on for some weeks. Never once in their evening perambulations along the river had Elfie or her father surprised them in a word. Yet they seemed supremely contented. When it rained they each put up an umbrella and watched the water drip from the privet hedge.	"It must he terribly dull for them," Elfie had observed one evening, "and if only they'd get a little closer it might cheer them up." She could not agree with her father that they were happy. Now apparently they'd got a little closer.	"P'raps he'll ask her to marry him tonight, and she'll give up her black bonnet. I wonder if Mr. Dobbs will buy them a wedding present. Oh, but he can't ; I was forgetting. Poor Mr. Dobbs." She then proceeded to relate to her father Mr. Dobbs's trouble. She told him how the shutters of the little shop might have to go up, and how Mr. and Mrs. Dobbs would have to go to the Workhouse ; and of the tears that had stood in Mr. Dobbs's eyes. "Fancy, Father, his crying!" she said softly. She got up from her seat. "And I must go if you've finished; I'm busy. I'm doing something that may help Mr. Dobbs. It's an idea, it came to me suddenly. It's something instead of blocks of ice and ferns and shouting, and grand, big, marble slabs ; something that may make people who walkGo	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEdown Brewers Lane stop and look at Mr. Dobbs's fish, it'sI wonder whether I should tell you, Daddy, or whether I shouldn't ?" She paused in her walk towards the door, and drawing from her pocket a sheet of paper, glanced at it with a puckered little frown on her forehead 'Of course, you might help it you approved.'''\Vell, you could try me," suggested the Major.	''Yes," agreed Elfie; "and-sometimes your poetry's quite good, too. But it would have to be short-when people are in a hurry they can't read long poems like 'Billy Binns'."'Of course they can't," agreed the Major.	Seeing that he viewed the situation intelligently, she unfolded her plan to him, and he accompanied her to the river. And there on a seat, some distance removed from Mr. Winks and the widow, with their heads close together, they worked hard at some poems which they hoped would be the means of preserving Mr. Dobbs's shop from a permanently shuttered condition11	Eihe, pink with excitement, crossed the Green a couple of mornings later en route to Mr. Dobbs's shop. It was a Saturday, and a whole long blissful day free from lessons was before her; added to which the palpitating pioneer work was to be hers of trying to save Mr. Dobbs from bankruptcy.	She had been round to him the previous afternoon brimful of plans for his salvation, into the secret of which lie had had to be admitted in order that those plans might fructify.	"Alone and unaided I cannot work this miracle," she had practically said, "but with your assistance much may be accomplished. You must be enterprising: you must risk a lot : you must risk all, in fact, in this last throw for fame and fortune."	It was Major Charrington who had put it into her head. He had said-the poems completed and neatly copied out on two little white cards in Elfie's best hand-writing : each card being duly attached flag-like to the end of a kitchen skewer -"These alone won't work the oracle if placed amongst few, small, and skinny fish for they would only accentuate the fewness, smallness, and skinniness'' (Major Charriiidon had found difficulty in pronouncing the last word : he said there were too many N's knocking about in it) ; "so there must he plenty tomorrow, an abundance of fish, an absolute crowding out of the premises with fish. The shop must look as though Mr. Dobbs had bought up Billingsgate, or a miracle like the one in the Bible had of a sudden been performed withinAN	UNDRESSED HEROINE 	t		tl5. You must tell him this from me. There must be	appearance of meanness, niggardliness, or poverty withregard to fish. There must be an abundance, a lavishness, asplendour, rivalling and surpassing even the splendour ofClxrisp's and the new shop at the corner. Then-people inpassing will pause and look. Then they will read your poems. Then-they will buy."	It was with a slight spasm of anxiety that Elfie turned the corner of Brewers Lane. Would Mr. Dobbs have successfully carried out their plan of campaign? Would he, giant-like, have risen to the occasionYes he had!	Elfie almost rubbed her eyes when she saw the little shop. This," she cried beneath her breath, "is magnificent I"Mr. Dobbs had indeed bought up Billingsgate.	It would be impossible to describe the variety or get anywhere near the number of fish which lay heaped up in hillocks about the marble slab that morning or to mention the dazzling extravagance of the shell-fish there displayed. When Lifie caught sight of three handsome lobsters she nearly fainted.	"Oh, Mr. Dobbs I" she cried ecstatically, "I can scarcely believe it."	"Nor can I," said he, roused from his customary phlegm while throwing more fish from wooden boxes on to the already crowded slab as though they were so many marbles. "Nor can Mrs. Dobbs. Says she to me just now: 'It's either our salvation or ruin. If it's ruin'--	"But it won't be. Mr. Dobbs, you wait till you've seem our poems, then you'll know it can't be. But time is passing, it's nine o'clock I must get to work. We must be finished before people begin to come along. Oh, and can't anything be done to stop Bert staring at us I"	Mr. Dobbs took one vast stride across the little street. A moment later Bert was not there. Whether he fell backward into the depths of Mrs. Prebble's newspaper shop, whether the pavement suddenly opened and swallowed him up, or whether Mr. Dobbs squeezed him into a bit of jelly and then threw him away, RIfle was unable to ascertain all she was able to maintain to her father later on was that Bert was there one moment, and gone the next.	'Now," said she, when she saw that a Bertless world had been vouchsafed unto her, "show me the mackerel."	With a wave of a hand Mr. Dobbs designated the fish in question, dozens of them, shining and beautiful in a heaped and careless mass, and beneath the gills of one Elfie stabbed a short skewer bearing at its apex a finger-post-like card with this inscription	62	AN UNI)RESSE1) hEROINE"Straight from the Sea I'm offered to thee. Astounding cheap. Price 3(1 or 4d.Then she passed on to a hillock of herrings, into the midst of which she stabbed another skewer and card and this bore the following:'Do you like a herringFrom the Loch of FyneCosting but a penny?If so, I am thine	Mr. Dobbs, who had retired to the back of the shop in order to be out of her way, was so thrilled at the catchincss and the sort of playful homeliness of these lines that he felt compelled to fetch Mrs. Dohhs to read them.	"Would put any customer in a good temper, even Mrs. Perkins from Paved Court, who always sniffs at the fish as though it was stiukin' bad and wants everythink for half price," observed Mr. Dobbs. "If I read a beautiful little poem like that I should sort of feel on friendly terms with the herrings-one of the family, so to speak. What's she putting now ?" He craned forward.	Bide was endeavouring to persuade a skewer and card to maintain an upright position in a lphster's claw, but it kept falling backward on to the lobster's head.	'Stick it through its hack ; find a joint; it will do no harm. Miss BIde," he encouraged her.	"But it would look so much better in a claw," she object cL "He would look like a lancer in my book of British soirii-s -wouldn't he ? Ah, that's got it."	Mr. and Mrs. Dohhs cautiously advanced from the sip' scarcely breathing, so fearful were they of upsetting tie precarious hold of the lance, to read the poem written on wiat Elfie described as its jxnnon'An hour ago I was alive (I'd dined oil little fish,); My spirit's flown, my body's left; Twill make a kingly dish."	Elfie watched them anxiously and asked them if they liked it.	"We," she said, "Father and I, didn't care for it so much as some. Father said there was a carnal smack about it Do you think there is ?""No," said Mr. Dobbs."Not a bit," said Mrs. Dobbs.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	63	Neither of them had the faintest idea what she meant, but they loved the poem.	Father liked this one for the whiting," said ElSe. think because I made it up. Father's like that. I know he does it to encourage me and often tells stories, but this time he said it was Gospel truth that there was such a light-hearted ring about it, and that it made one feel for once a whiting could be happy, and not the depressed creature we are accustomed to meet, with tears in its eyes and its tail in its mouth" She produced her poem diffidently, scanning their faces whilst they read it. To refresh the reader's memory we reproduce the classic lines without apology'I'm only a little whiting, But, 0, so very nice! You can only eat me once, Though you'll want to eat me twice."	Mr. and Mrs. Dobbs were really so moved, moved to a mixture of laughter and tears as the little epic, with its mixture of humility ("I'm only a little whiting") and coeksureness ("You'll want to eat me twice"), slowly filtered into their minds, that at first words failed them. Then, Mrs. Dobbs gaining command of her feelings, murmured : "I like it even better than 'Little Drops of Water', Miss ElSe it's real lovely, and-I believe we're made. I feel it right through me, that we've come to the turnin' point of our kereer. Don't you, Mr. Dobbs? And-why, there's that Bert-I thought you said-"	Mr. Dobbs made another vast movement across the Lane, and again Bert vanished into space.Iv	It was one o'clock. Mr. Dobbs's shutters were up. Re was sold out. Looking back to it, ElSe thought it had been the most radiant morning of her life, and also the stuffiest, for she Rnd Mrs. Dobbs had jointly shared the Dobbs's small parlour, and in turn had peeped through a chink in a minute, heavilycurtailed window, to watch all that was "going on" in and putside the shop.	And what "goings on" there had been, to be sure! A Lord Mayor's Show or Duckling's half-yearly sale was not in it, Mrs. Dobbs kept repeating as the people flocked down	3rewers Lane-one person kept telling another as they met shopping in various parts of the town what fun was to be found that morning at the end of the little lane, so they came to stare and laugh, and they stayed to buy64	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEMiss Doyle was one of the earliest callers. She'd btun	nosing after" cheap fish at the new corner shop. She wanted bream at fourpeiice a pound. Haddock was to be had at fivepence, but not bream, and haddock would not do, Mr. I)evie being stingy in the weekly allowance for housekeeping.	Try Dobbs's," suggested a friend who Overheard her inquiry.	"Dobbs's I'' It would be difficult to convey the scorn in Miss Doyle's voice as she pronounced the name with a sort of shark-like snapping together of her jaws "Dobbs has nothing but 1 doaters and cockles.''	'Dobbs today has more fish than any shop in Richmond. Fish in conjunction with poems-gems.'' With which cryptic observation the friend hurried on to scold the owner of a vegetable shop for not delivering two-pennyworth of greens the day before, and Miss Doyle, her curiosity aroused, proceeded to Brewers Lane, and when she saw its congested state as she turned the corner from George Street, she could scarcely restrain herself from breaking into a run to ascertain the cause of the excitement.	It seemed to her, when a little pantingly she had poked her way through the throng of interested and amused and expectant purchasers to the front of the little shop, that everybody she knew in Richmond was congregated there, from Mrs. lngleby of Cholmondeley Court to Mr. Winks, the waterman. (Bert had also turned up after his last annihilation, miraculously whole in wind and limb.)	Mrs. Inglehy was purchasing a lobster and chuckling gently to herself. When it was wrapped up and handed to her, for she insisted upon taking it away herself, she demanded the poem which had been -rasped in its claw, for in the poem she had immediately uivined the hand of Elfie, and she wanted to take it home to exhibit to her husband and Brian. Mr. Dobbs hesitated. There were two lobsters left. Would they sell without their catchy advertisement ? He felt Elfie should be consulted. Asking Mrs. Inglebv to excuse him for a moment, he withdrew soundlessly, leaving behind him that sense of vacancy, of "nothingness", which one experiences when a large seal suddenly sinks beneath the surface of a pond at the Zoo.	There was a hun ied whispered colloquy in the parlour at the back."Tell her she can have it for sixpence extra," said Elfiethe business-like,"But-""Sixpence or not at all," said Elfie with frightful firmness.	Mr. Dobbs imparted the information to Mrs. Ingleby with a shame-faced eye on a malignant-looking John Dory.AN		UNDRESSED HEROINE	65	Certainly, agreed the lady, "and you can keep the skewer. Miss Elf- I mean you may want it for another card, a laseintie of this, to assist in the sale of the remaining lobsters. Good day, Mr. Dobbs; I have never met a more ciqo-able fish shop in my lit-those lines on the whiting are ilehcious-l load in) id( a you were a poet." 1-Icr eves were III![ of twinkling nusel,n-f. ''1-hit I must not keep you there ne dozens waiting to be served.''	'l'lte dozens became so urgent in their demands that Mr. I )ohhs was compelled to requisition the aid of Mrs. I )ohhs, though two of them serving filled the little place to overflowing and fiumallv Mr I)ohhs took up a position outs-uk and banded in the fish to Mrs. I)ohhs to it eigh and wrap np---not in newspaper (except as an inner covering) but in firm, shiny, and crisp paper of brown And LIfe, at her peephole, hecnwe so jubilant its she watched the rapid diminishing of the hillocks of fish, that when her father came along just before one o'clock and purchased the last four herrings for their breakfast the following morning, she could no longer contain herself, and bursting forth from the little back-room she rapturously flung herself upon him with a cry of : ''The shutters will have to go tip, Daddy, but only because we're sold out. Isn't it too gorgopernns	Later, Mr. and Mrs. Dobbs carefully put away the little cards and skewers into an empty starch-box for use on future iccasmons. The poelu on the whiting \lr. I )nbbs handled with loving and almost reverent fiegers	''She wrote this herself, lie nevem helped hem a bit, and it's the best of the lot, to ni-i thinking. The way them whiting went was like a run on a bank Mm- Perkins fairly fought the gas-bill collector for the last three, and s/u won becano he was a gentlemano and didn't earn' an umbrella	''I saw- their liencntniter, '' said Mrs. Dobbs, "and it was like a beautiful dream. or ho \\ you 'eel when vou'rt going oft nnder gas.'''A beautiful dream I'''1 don't mean Mrs. Perkins using her umbrella, but tia wayt lie fish went oft it was miraculous, and all because of half adozen bits of pnenis.' 	-''It wasn't t lie poems-it was the novelty of them It was	change from mis accidents and such-like ; and we've got to keep it up, Mrs. Dobbs, if we're going to retain the custi..mers that have suddenly conic to iii . We mustn't lit 'em lu - dcci yed back to (Thrisp's, and the hew shop You and 1 have got to urn into umniorous poets in our old age, anti after I've bad a c-st I'll begin right ntvav on a hake.''	And he (lid and In- six o'clock that ev'nhmg a weary hot ian might lois-c been dleenvi red it ting ii-, c ili--cted attitude66	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEin his back-parlour staring at a sheet of paper which had become grim)' and crumpled with much handling and on which was inscribed the followingDo you want a nice fresh hakeWhich to boil or else to bake-'And there he had stuck. For two solid hours the words rake and cake had rotated through Mr. Dobbs's hot, aching head, and he could find no use for either. Indeed, so sort of hypnotized was he becoming at the very jingle of the words in his tired brain that he'd difficulty in maintaining an upright position and when Mrs. Dobbs came in to set the tea he murmured in a broken voice : "I'd rather be bankrupt and go to the workhouse tomorrow, Mrs. Dobbs, than try any longer to write a poem about a blooming hake." And he meant it.CHAPTER VIA SUPPER-PARTY WITH THE FAIRIES IN RICHMOND PARKWHAT a night it was when Elfie and her father went to Fairyland (Bracken Slope in a south-west corner of Richmond Park) and first encountered Rose Marie the little elf and the faun Peter Bumblebee It was a night simply thrilling with romance. First of all it was full of moonlight, a three-quarter moon, which is prettier in shape than a quite round one, which always seems to be winking its eye at you in impudent fashion. Then, it was full of a cool warmth, after a very hot day. It was Elfie who described it thus, and her father quite understood what she meant: warm enough to take one's supper out and eat it in a fairy ring, yet cool with the delicious coolness that moonlight and bracken and great trees bring when the sun has gone to bed. Then there was the scent of the limes, for it was July, which RIfle kept pausing to sniff, and there were the sounds of browsing deer and little sleepy notes of nightbirds.	"Isn't it heavenly, Daddy ?" she whispered, when they had squatted down in a fairy ring of brown and spotted toadstools (the toadstools had come early that year) in a grassy clearing close to the dense growth of bracken. "I'm sure we shall see them tonight. Aren't you ?""Yes," said the Major. "But we must keep very quiet.a		NDRLS5ED HEROINE	67What do you say to setting the supper, then we shall be ready when they come ?''	Softly they spread the things on the grass. Sandwiches were placed on dishes of bracken, big oak leaves supported Maids-of-Honour from Willet's on Hill Rise, chocolates rested on plates of beech leaves, and all were ornamented with tinyfaced flowers which Ellie found nestling close to the grass.	"They were so sleepy, the darlings, I hardly liked to pick them, but when they heard it was to be a fairies' party they were quite glad to come,' she whispered. "And- Daddy, look over there I believe I can see them. . No, near to the big oak tree, just where the moon catches it. , Do you see ? Oh, there are two of them, two angelic fairies, andone is dancing. Can you see them ?"	"Yes," said the Major, "and one is playing a pipe. It's Peter the faun-1 always knew he would come. I've seen him in my dreams.""And the other," asked Elfie excitedly, "who is she ?'	"It's Rose Marie, the fairy. I'll tell you about them in a little poem."The Major in a low voice (he had composed the poem thatafternoon in readiness) repeated these lines"Down in Bracken Slope, in an old oak tree,There lived a little elf whose name was Rose Marie.Her frock was made of gossamer, her petticoat was green, Her hat was just a buttercup, her shoes of silver sheenDown in Bracken Slope, in a hornbeam tree,There lived a little faun named Peter Bumblebee,His jerkin was of beech leaves, his hose of sorrel brown, Upon his little head he wore a dainty oak-leaf crown.Down in Bracken Slope, one fragrant summer night,Rose Marie saw Peter in the pale moonlightHe was piping sweetly on a slender reed,She was dancing lightly o'er the dewy mead.'Peter, pipe a dance,' she cried, 'thy music makes me sad.'A waltz soon thrilled along the slope, her laughter rippled glad. 'Peter, come and dance with me and throw away thy reed.'He took her hand, she pirouetted light as poppy seed'Peter, I am very tired,' she murmured in his ear.He bent and kissed her on the lips and whispered 'Oh, my dear, I love you so, my heart will break unless you'll conic with me, And share my little home in the hornbeam tree'."'Oh	cried Elfie, 'how sweet I Isn't Rose Marie tooducky ?" She sighed with delight. She saw Rose Marie in her vivid imagination just as her father described her.You dance too," suggested the Major.	'But," she objected, "I've no gossamer frock, or silver sheen slippers, same as Rose Marie's. My shoes are old and brown, I have patches.''68	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	Take them off," he said wickedly, 'and your stockings too. No one will know, and the grass is quite dry.""Shall I?""Yes, and then we'll have supper."nShe danced to an audience 01 three,	Brian, who had gathered from her veiled hints that something unusual was to take place that night in the Park, had dragged forth Humphry Doyle from his books, to help him to ''nose out'' what it was. "They'll be on what they call Bracken Slope," lie said, "at the far end of Sudhrook Park," and when they saw Elfie skipping about, a small gleaming white thing in the moonlight, they rubbed their eyes and thought they had indeed stumbled accidentally across a fairy. The Major, reclining amongst the bracken beneath an ash tree, was at first invisible and the two boys stood rooted to the ground, watching Elfie's flying, twinkling feet, till, exhausted, she flung herself down beside her father. Then they clapped and cheered till the browsing deer fled away in terror.	They were invited to stay to supper by the Major, who was always hospitable. Elfie frankly did not want them, not even her beloved Brian. Boys didn't understand fairies, and would laugh at their plates of oak leaves and dishes of bracken. Besides, was there enough to go round ? Elfie, though a fairy tonight, had a very human appetite, and it was an hour past her usual supper-time.	The Major, divining her anxiety, suggested further supplies might be discovered at Ham Lodge, which could just be seen nestling in a hollow in the distance: A loaf of bread, some butter, a pot of tea! The lodge-keeper and his wife might be amenable On moonlight nights, when the limes were sweetening the air, everybody was kind.	Humphry volunteered to go. He was not an unselfish and he was a shy boy, but he longed to join the supper-patty. Supper under the trees with the jolly Major and with Elfie, whom he loved better than anything in the world, sounded much more attractive than supper in a prim dining-room with a prim Uncle and Aunt who discussed ways and means and the delinquencies of their neighbours (chiefly those residing at No. s) while eating hard cold boiled beef-cold boiled beef being very economical-and undressed lettuce with no egg at the top.	Fle was away some little time, and when he returned his hands were empty. "I'm sorry," he said, "but no luck. IAN UNDRESSED HEROiNE	09drew a blank. Couldn't be bothered at this time ol night, they said, and they might run short themselves for their own breakfast."'Pigs I" ejaculated Brian. "1 will go.'	Brian was already conscious of his own powers of persuasion, especially with women.	He was back in less than ten minutes with half a loaf, butter, an apple-pie and some ginger-beer; and he entered into the preparations for the meal with enthusiasm. That was where he so scored over Humphry. He made himself so nice, so indispensable to his friends, his manner was so charming. While Humphry sat and stared moodily at the arrangement of plates and dishes, and places were being set in readiness for Rose Marie and Peter Bumblebee, in ease they should deign to join them, Brian was a resourceful and enthusiastic helper. If Elfie were having a "make-believe" party, then Brian was willing to humour the little girl, and sink the big, strong masculine boy within him and (10 her bidding. Ever since he had so bitterly wounded her feelings through his careless reference to codfish, lie had wished to make amends, and now was his opportunity, and he seized it with both hands; and the brighter and jollier he became the moodier Flumphry grew.	It was not that Humphry was bored, and that from choice he "looked on", he longed most earnestly not to "look on". He longed most earnestly to help to entertain Elfie and make her laughter ring along the slope as Brian was making it. But he was not "that sort", he told himself bitterly. He was aware of his own gaucheness, his awkwardness of manner, his dull silences. He longed most earnestly to be able to talk, to say bright, amusing things, and the more he desired it, the duller he became.	"Some chaps can do it and get themselves liked, and some chaps can't do it, and get themselves hated," he thought, "and I'm one of the last; and yet I'd do anything for her and the Major." And just because he wanted to do so much he did nothing at all, and he sat shyly there eating large portions of bread and butter and apple-pie in silence, and when the feast was over twiddling his fingers and thumbs, while envying Brian his fluency of speech and ease of manner and wishing he had never been born.	The kind Major, divining the boy's trouble, tried to draw him out by inquiring when he was leaving St. Paul's, and what he was going to be.AN UNDRESSED HEROINEHomphry replied lie didn't know. It rested with his uncle.	'And have you no wish in the matter ?" inquired the Major. Brian was busy trying to fashion a little crown of oak leaves for Elfie like Peter Bumblebee's.	If 1 had, it wouldn't he gratified," replied Humphry a little roughly. 'I expect it will be a hank or an insurance office. Both safe, dull, and with pensions attached.''''But you have some money from your father V	I know, but not till I'm twenty-one. My uncle is my guardian, and he can do as he likes with me till then. He doesn't care for me, so he's sure to suggest something poisonous, and-I ought to he going home or there'll be a row." Humphry got up, and it seemed to Elfie, who was watching him, he was never going to stop getting up. He had grown a tall, lanky boy, stooped, and his face invariably wore a moody frowning expression. It wore it now.	"Why don't you ever smile like Brian ?" she asked, involuntarily, looking from one to the other.	Humphry coloured a deep red. "Because I've nothing to smile about.''	She sensed that he was hurt. She did not particularly care for Humphry, but she wouldn't have hurt a cockroach, much less a friend. She slipped a warm, kind little hand into his.	'Let's go on first," she suggested. "Brian will help Daddy to pack up. Why have you nothing to smile about ? I have heaps."	"You've people to love you," said the boy, shaken out of his reserve in a strong sudden need of sympathy from someone."Doesn't anyone love you ?""No."	Elfie considered this as they threaded their way in and out of the high-growing bracken, after waving a good-bye to Rose Marie and Peter Bumblebee, who, she said, had retired to their little home in the tallest and oldest of the hornbeam trees.'Why do you think nobody loves you"I suppose because I'm not nice.""But that is your fault, isn't it ?"	"No," returned I-lumphry, so violently that RIfle, startled, released his hand. "I was made that way, and I've had a rotten home. Supposing you'd to live with my uncle and aunt, do you tlunk you'd he nice, and jolly and happy ?"	"No," Said RIfle, "hut-I have my troubles," she added with old-fashioned dignity. She thought of her father's "giddy attacks", certainly rarer of late, but liable to crop up at any moment, and of the odious Mr. Bonnet, and the twenty pounds they had owed Duckling's-she had never put her nose inside the shop since-and of her mother's repinings and.\N		UNDRESSLIJ	FiE1(OINL	71constant depression and retiring to bed and of their chronic hard-upness. Since the Mr. Bonnet episode, of which her father had been apprised with floods of tears and reproaches and threats to "leave him" by her mother, all of which Elfie had heard, there had been the most stringent economy in the house.	There were to be no more bills, no more luxuries in the way of hot buttered toast for tea on rainy days (save for Mrs. Charrington on the occasion of a crisis when she went to bed), 110 more new frocks for ever and ever so long, the old ones must be made to do, and patched and darned and let down by Bridget in her spare moments; there were to be no more new poetry books or fairy tales, which her father had delighted to lavish upon her without any excuse of birthdays or Christmas for so doing; and there were baked hearts at threepcnce apiece for dinner every Friday ; and done-up hearts with sage and onions every Saturday, both of which delicacies Elfie detested, but which she manfully ate for fear of distressing her father.	Humphry smiled at her grown-upness and he recaptured her hand. He asked her what her troubles were, and she mentioned the baked hearts and dearth of poetry books. "But I'd rather eat hearts every day of my life," she said, "than have nobody love me. It must be dreadful."	He agreed it wasn't pleasant. "Do you think 3011 could care for me a little ?" he blurted out, forgetting his shyness and that she was only a small girl and he rapidly approaching manhood.	She considered the proposition carefully. She felt sorry for him, but she wasn't going to commit herself to anything great in the way of affection."I could try," she said cautiously, "but I don't say I can.""You like Brian."''Oh yes." Her tone was warm."Well, why can't you like me ?""Well, you're not Brian," she replied with feminine readiness.	"Nn," he said, "that's true." And beneath his breath "And I'm hanged if I want to he, the jabbering, smug ape."CHAPTER VIIIN WHICH MAJOR cHAI1EINCTON FINDS A FRIEND: ANDMRS. CHARR1NGTON PASSES INTO THE UNSEENiterIx left school when she was fifteen. She was in no senseAN UNDRESSED HEROINEol the word finished'. She was, as a matter of exactitude, a little ignorant and without any accomplishments, but she oiLs quick, original, and Miss Brereton, the head mistress of the school, remarked to the staff on the afternoon of her departure ''With her great love of reading she will know more than most girls by the time she has reached the age of seventeen and-her manners are perfect."	Ellie was taken from school at this early age because she was so much needed at home by both parents. Mrs. Charrington was slowly dying of pernicious anmia, that dread malady, so rarely cured, which comes like a thief in the night, stealthily but very surely ; and Major Charrington, through loneliness (Elfie's time being so much occupied with her lessons), dullness, and depression of spirits was more and more giving way to his weakness, loathing himself for it, ashamed to meet his little daughter's eye after each attack, and yet, manifestly, so weakening in will-power that, notwithstanding all his stern efforts and sworn resolves to pull himself together, each day found him (and to his own abject dismay) sinking deeper into the horrible mire of insobriety.	'Something must be done," he said one day to his wile.'We both want Elfie. You are ill. I-I am worse. I'm	a fool, a swine, a hideously selfish beast 	his lipstrembled. "If Elfie were at home with us always, 1 believewe should both he better. Would it be cruel to the child totake her from school ? What do you think ?''	Mrs. Charrin'gton's reply was a very bitter one : "Always the child, the child, the child. I don't count. I'm practically dead and (lone for. Don't think of me. But if by taking her from school you will he transformed from a drunken sot to a decent Englishman, by all means take her" She turned on her side and closed her eyes. That her husband was cut to the quick she eared not a rap. Any little affection she might once have felt for him was dead-not on account of his failing, that she would have overlooked in a rich man, but because of what lie had brought her to through the loss of his fortune. She thought only of herself now, of her illness, of her shabby surroundings, and, above all, of her loss of looks. She had no idea she was dying-bad the doctor or her husband ventured to tell her that her condition was hopeless, she would have refused to helic've them. Anamia was such a common everyday malady ; and the worst part of her condition to her was the yellowing of her skin-that she resented fiercely, bitterly. She made manful efforts to combat the ravages of the disease rouge and powder she applied to her bloodless face, pink salve to her bloodless lips, all of which only accentuated the pitiful dreadfulness of her appearance. To Major Charrington it was horrible; and in great yearningAN		UNDRESSED HEROINE	73pity for her he would sometimes hold her wasted form in his arms as though to shield her from what was so near at hand, and he waited upon her with a devotion touching to behold. But with fretfulness she would push him away. She did not desire love-making '--what she wanted was the return of her old handsome looks, some pretty fine lingerie, one or two costly tea-gowns, some delicate well-cooked food and noiseless welltrained servants. Her husband and child were the least of her desires. For hours she would sit, when she was feeling a little stronger, gazing at herself in her mirror, arranging her hair, studying her strangely altered face till she could have shrieked aloud out of pity for herself.	I might be an Egyptian mummy or a dead Chinese," she would whisper to herself, her pallid lips scarcely able to frame the words, "and once 1 was one of the most beautiful women in India." Nausea and faintness would, in the end, force her to return to her bed, where she would lie, a crumpled heap of outraged weeping womanhood, till kindly sleep took her into its arms and soothed her to rest and forgetfulness.Ii	It was on a lovely afternoon of spring that Elfie said goodbye to her mistresses and schoolmates, and bursting into her home with a voice that thrilled like a young blackbird's announced to her father, who awaited her "I've left, Father. School is finished for ever, lessons are done with for ever"with a swift turn of a wrist she spun her satchel of books across the table--and now let us go out. Mother is asleep, Bridget has just told me and we'll be hack before she wakes up. Come along, Father."	Arm in arm they betook themselves to the river and Cholmondeley Walk, where the chestnuts were now alight with their pink and white candles, and where snowy hawthorn foamed over the bushes and hedges.	They passed Isleworth Eyot (Billy Binns was not to be seen today) and the osier bed which after its bleak woebegone wintry look was now a quivering mass of green spearlike willows. They passed the Ferry, and the sombre pile of Syon House, and the flat green meadows of the Northumberland Estate, and the row of poplars, which Elfie had christened the "fifteen sisters" standing so straight and green and prim against the blue of the sky.	'Let us sit down, Father dear," said she. "It is some time since we sat together on the old bench in hawthorn time. Doesn't everything smell sweet ? To think that never again shall I sit droning through the long spring and summer74	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEafternoons, trying to learn difficult things that don't matter, that were finished with hundreds of years ago, such as Roman battles and sieges of Troy, and I can come out to this when I want to."	'But knowledge is useful," Major Charrington felt it his duty to remark, though in his heart he was in full accordance with her sentiments.	'Perhaps," said she carelessly, 'but what is knowledge when one can have this ?" She threw her hands out towards the shining river. "When one is splitting one's head with a terrible and fearsome problem in Euclid, the river is dancing in the sunshine and singing with delight at being free from restraint and having no bothering lessons set it to learn, and the wagtails dip and bob and duck and shake their tails in delightsome fashion. Of course,'' she added, after a while, when she'd looked at everything, "I am sorry, Father dear, for the cause that has taken me from school, for poor Mother's illness, but all same, it's heavenly to have left. The world is so beautiful. It's good just to be alive today, not to be dead and still and hidden away from everything. I feel sorry for all dead people on an afternoon such as this."	A shadow passed over Major Carrington's face. Did Elfie realize how near to death was her own mother ? He believed not. Ought he to tell her, he asked himself. Neither of them loved her greatly, he was only too sadly conscious ; neither would miss her greatly, for of her own choice she had passed her life apart from them. But he was made of the stuff that is loyal to its own and to that which had once been beloved; and lie was filled with a deep compassion for his suffering and unhappy wife.	"RIfle," he said. At his tone she turned and looked at him and found that his face was grave."Yes, Father."	"Do you know that your mother is very ill, so ill that she will never get well again ?""Yes, Father.""You do know." He sighed with relief.She nodded."How long have you known ?""For some time-at least I guessed."	There was no horror or distress in RIfle's attitude, only a quiet acceptance of a situation that was impossible for her to alter. Her father watched her with some sadness, but it was a sadness not for the child but for the mother who had evoked so little love for that child."Don't you think it is terrible, Elfie ?'"What ?" she asked."About your mother."AN		UNOaESSE1)	HEROINE	75'No, Father.''He sat amazed and shocked.She slipped a hand into his.	That she should have to die is the least dreadful part for -Mother, I think, I said just now I was sorry for all people who were dead, but I shan't be for Mother."	The Major sat bereft of speech. There was a solemn deliberation, an earnestness in Elfie's words and manner that staggered him.	I am terribly sorry that she has to suffer so much It nlakes me all hot and cold and sick and shaky inside and everything goes black before my eyes when I think that God, who is supposed to be kind, makes her have all that cruel	pain and be such a dreadful colour . 	Elfie spoke withpassionate intensity, and great burning tears filled her owneyes. 'But for poor Mother to be dead will, I think, be betterthan to be alive, if all we are told in the Bible and in church istrue, for then she will be no longer unhappy."The Major started.	"Do you think, then, she has always been unhappy, Flue ?" For the first time Major Charrington addressed his daughter as though she had ceased suddenly to be a child and had grown up.''Yes, Father."Pain and remorse had the Major in their grip.	'I can never remember seeing Mother bright and laughing, like Mrs. lugleby, can you ? She has never played with me, I mean us." (Her father's heart lifted a little at the correction of the pronoun.) "And she has never seemed to want us, neither you nor me, has she ? Always she has talked of India, and the lovely things she possessed before she had me, and the lovely dresses sIc wore, and the carriages she drove in, and the parties she went to when you were rich. And look how she's cried and cried, Father, hasn't she ? Oh, the eau-de-Cologne handkerchiefs I've put on her head, dozens and dozens. . . And that day Mr. Bonnet came, four years ago ... Oh, I'm sorry, Father dear, I forgot.""Go on," he commanded.	"I-I've finished," she stammered in deep distress at the expression on his face. She squeezed his hand."Finish, Elfie; say what you were going to say.""I've forgotten.""Elfie I""But it will hurt you, darling.'"That's all right I deserve it."	"Oh no, you don't." She turned and tried to encircle his big waist with her slim little arm, but so unsuccessfully that she abandoned her effort, and, instead, fell to patting his leg.70	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEThere never was anyone like you, Daddy," she murmured."I hope not," he said grimly."Don't, Father.'"I've been a failure. 'And so have I."He could not help smiling at her old-fashioned gravity."In what respect, my chicken ?"	"I've lost more marks this term than any girl in the school for untidiness, not in my work or desk, but in myself."	He regarded her critically. "You do look a bit of a rapscallion. Don't you want anew hat, Elfie ?"	"There's no money for new hats, and this is comfy and sticks on my head."	"But you could have the brim stitched, it's showing daylight through it, and that bow looks as though it had been sat on for a fortnight by a broody hen."	She laughed. "I've no time for mending or for thinking about clothes."	"You mean you've no inclination, Elfie. You must remember you're growing up." He spoke impressively. "I believe I saw a hole in your stocking just now."	She twisted one brown-shod foot-where a hole in the heel was visible above the low-cut shoe-behind the other, and swung them together airily. "It's gone now."	"But it will resurrect when we move on. You must begin to take more pride in your personal appearance, my pigeon, now that your mother is too ill to look after you. Do you hear ?"	"Yes, Father.' She refrained from saying that her mother never had looked after her, or very little of late years ; and he saw that his admonition had run off her as water from a duck's back. He looked into her small, mischievously demure face flushed with the warmth of the May sunshine, and he wondered how soon she would become aware of her own loveliness; and his heart contracted with sudden jealousy as lie looked ahead through the years to a day that would inevitably come when he must yield her to some other man.	"She's the sort that a man would die for," he thought; and he had no idea that, like most fond fathers, he tended to exaggeration.III	Between them they nursed the invalid with much tenderness and patience, but it was a painful time for all.	Sometimes, as the months passed, Major Charrington's heart was faint within him, and he wondered if he could faceAN UNORESSF.I) III, UOii.	77another day. His wife's repining was so incessant, her irritability so difficult to meet with unfailing temper and cheerfulness, her wretchedness so grievous to witness and so powerless to help.	Elfie, being young, could throw oft her trouble as soon as she had vacated the sick-room a walk with Brian when he was down for the Long Vacation from Oxford, a tramp through the park with Humphry, a few hours in town with Rosamond Arkwright, or tea with Mrs. Ingleby, would bring her back laughing and refreshed. But for poor Major Charrington it was a time of hideous trial. How he fought against the craving to drown his troubles at the cheerful "Spiders" round the corner, he, God, and a Colonel \Vyckham alone knew.	Colonel \Vyckham lie had known slightly years ago in India, and when the two men knocked up against each other accidentally in Richmond one day, Major Charrington, who had few friends, would have liked to renew the acquaintance, but Colonel Wyckham exhibited no signs of reciprocating this feeling, for he feared his servant Jarvis, who "did" for him.	J arvis, who was an ex-soldier, suffered from an enlarged liver, was of lethargic temperament (which is another name for laziness) and objected strongly to "company- in any shape or form. If the Colonel so much as asked a friend in for a cup of tea, Jarvis in his kitchen showed horrid temper and clouted a meek red cat from the hearthrug with the ovencloth. A friend to tea meant extra work for Jarvis; there were two cups and saucers and spoons to wash instead of one, and the Colonel would go having horrid jammy messes and extra things like buns and scones to be buttered for his wretched visitors. "Such nonsense and extravagance," Jar-Os said, who had charge of the housekceping money, and out of which he saved a considerable little sum for his own pocket each week. Why couldn't the visitor be satisfied with plain bread and butter ? Tea wasn't a weal at which to eat like a hog!	Master and servant lived in an old-fashioned house in Ormond Road, opposite to the Bridge, a road, by the way, which strongly met with Major Charrington's and Elfie's approval. They never deigned to glance at the various	parallel roads leading up to the Hill . 	Might as well hein Ealing," said the Major. "Or Clapham," said Elfie, whohad never been there in her life. "So ordinary and dull," saidthe Major. "And the houses only having each other to stareat across the road,'' said Elfie, ''poor things. Nothing hotugly slate roofs and yellow brick walls and prim, ugly box,windows."Jarvis did all the work (that was done), save for a weekls7,)	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE"cleaning down", which rite was performed by a 'Miss Judd, with strong, thin arms and capable large-jointed hands, who held the poorest opinion of Jarvis possible to a single woman with "hopes" of a single man. ''A lazy, greedy lout,'' she described him to her intimate friend, Mrs. Dibdin, who cleaned the Parish Church, "who rides over his master as though he was an infant in long clothes. And the Colonel a big fool to let himself be bossed by a man. A woman bossing him would be different. Women were ordained by the Lord to take care of men and see as they don't get into mischief; but Jarvis. Ugh And he's that slimy, I believe the Colonel is fair frightened of him."	After this encounter with Major Charrington, Colonel Wyekham had in reality been filled with a strong desire to ask the genial Major in for a friendly smoke and drink and yarn about old Indian days, but Jarvis had discouraged him in the proposed hospitality.	"Don't you do it, sir. I hear he visits the 'Spiders' far more'n as is good for him. Once get him here, you'll never get him out. A gentleman who drinks is difficult to get rid of. He'll be lyin' about the sofas and floors till all hours."	So against his own more kindly promptings of heart Colonel Wyekham had kept Major Charrington at arm's length, and was ashamed of himself thereby.	"I might have given him a leg-up sometimes when he was down on his luck. Hear he's got a tiresome wife- But perhaps Jarvis is right . . . . Can't afford to offend Jarvis." And when he met the Major he would look (if he thought he had not been recognized) the other way, and then trounce himself for a mean, self-protecting worm.	But a morning came, a dripping, dreary November morning, with a brooding mist hanging about the river and Green, and the buses churning up a muddy slime which they splashed impartially on to the depressed pedestrians in George Street, when Colonel \Vvekham, on his way to glance at the illustrated papers at the Free Library, which was warm and cheerful on dank, (lark mornings, ran into Major Charrington just outside the ''Spiders''. Major Charrington was unusually ''down". He had passed a sleepless night. Mrs. Charrington had required constant attention pillows shaken up, pillows flattened down, hot drinks, hot-water bottles, windows opened, windows shut. So ill, in fact, was the poor wretched woman she didn't know what she did want and the Major, suffering almost as much as she, through his futility to help her, was a spent and hopeless man by the time the cold grey dawn crept into the room. She then slept from exhaustion. He was past sleep, and he could touch no breakfast. Then his weakened vitality cried out for something strong and revivifying, criedAN		LT NoREsuEI)	If E[ZOIN}.	79with such learful strength that, try a lu Would, he conic! not crush it, and while Elfie was engaged with Bridget in the kitchen, he crept out of the house, shivering as the clammy fog closed in about him, and made for the "Spiders".	I can't help it," he said, as he stumbled along Friar's Lane. "I'm so tired, so infernally tired. God knows I'm tired, and-'	lie saw Colonel Wyckham ; he tried to avoid him; but, struck by the wretchedness, the bleak misery of the other man's countenance, the Colonel involuntarily stopped and put out his hand."You look ill," he said.	"My wife's ill and-I'm tired.' Major Charrington averted his eyes."Which way are you going ?" asked the Colonel.	The Major hesitated. Then he plumped it out desperately. He was past caring what any man thought of him.	"I was going in here for a lush-up. I've had a bad night. I must have something. I'm done."	"1 shouldn't. Have some hot coffee instead. Will do you more good. Capital stuff for bucking you up. I know just how you feel." (The Colonel didn't.) "Been up all night, I suppose ?"	"Yes." The Major stood with one foot on the step of the public-house. He wished the Colonel would go. He was feeling queer for want of something to eat-or drink. Wavy lines obscured his vision the fog seemed to be pressing on his head like some evil monster, the Colonel's voice sounded a long way off. He clutched the lintel of the door, and but for a hand (the Colonel's) that shot forth to his aid, he would have fallen.	"Look here," he heard a voice saying a long way off, "you've got to come home with me. It isn't far-and I'll give you some hot coffee-my man Jarvis is a capital hand at coffee." (Jarvis, enjoying the Daily Telegraph over a cosy fire, little knew what he was in for.) "Here, hang on to me. That's better."Iv	Half an hour later Major Charrington was talking to old Colonel \Vyckham as he had not talked to another man in his life ; as he had not talked to another living creature, for the matter of that. He was laying bare his soul, which meant his weakness, and he was amazed at the relief of thus unburdening himself to a man-almost a stranger.But the man was so understanding, so sensible. Didn'tSo	AN	UNDRESSED HEROINEseem shocked, only sympathetic and so foil of this splendid and amazing comprehension And he gave him coffee, too -hot, delicious stuff before a glowing fire-and some nice crisp toast and butter and little by little, as lie thawed, and the warmth coursed through his veins and his trembling hands became steady, the Major found himself feeling better and more cheerful than lie had felt for months. And Colonel Wyckham, after practically cutting him for years, was now apparently so keen on making his acquaintance, on hearing everything about him and his family and household.It was astonishing. And all done without impertinent curiosity -just genuine interest, the Major could see-the interest that makes men talk, draws them out. He found himself presently telling him about Elfie, and when he talked of Ellie, welltime passed.	Jarvis came scowhngly and removed the coffee cups. When the Colonel had rung and had quite calmly (for the Colonel in his suddenly made determination to hell) this man if he could, to save him from himself, had completely forgotten there would be an outraged Jarvis to contend with) ordered coffee, hot and strong, to he brought immediately, Jarvis was so staggered that he was unable to think of anything to say but	Yes, sir," which he never meant to say and could afterwards, on reflection, have bitten out his tongue for having said. Yet he made the coffee. Why, he didn't know. When he descended to the kitchen he didn't mean to make it. He meant in ten minutes to ascend and say the fire had gone out and there was no milk But he made it-there were strange happenings in the house that morning-and twice he kicked the red cat out of the way while making it, and again he kicked her while he searched for a clean napkin to put on the tray. And when he had got it all prepared he told himself he wouldn't take it up and sat down firmly on a chair but a sharp ring of the dining-room bell got him quickly to his feet, and the next minute lie was walking quite swiftly up the stairs and knocking at the door and placing the tray as deferentially before Major Charrington as he would have placed it before the Lord Chancellor of England.	''But I never shall again," he vowed, 'Not if the Colonel rings till he's black in the face. I'm not here to make coffee for inebriates at ten o'clock of a morning. This is the larst time. The Colonel can't he permitted to carry on this sort of a game. Next time he goes a-ringin' I'm out of coffee and the cat's stole the milk." He made a lunge at the poor red cat, who was doing nothing but clean its own smudge of a face. "The very larst time Major Charrington gets coffee in this house or my name's not William P. Jarvis."AN		UNfliitSSEL)	IILLOINE	SiV	But William P. Jarvis spoke too soon. It was not the last time ho made cotice for Major Charrington. He made it frequently in the clays to follow, and at all hours of the day and night.	Colonel Wyekham was 'out" to save the Major, and he saved him.	He started by inviting him to drop in one evening for a wheeze.	The Major was touched and delighted. He had always longed for a little congenial society, but his wife had discouraged him in his social aspirations. "We've no money to entertain, and we've no money to be entertained. You're shabby and I'm shabbier." She did not mean to reproach him. She was not always unkind, and she had passed the remark without bitterness; but she knew he would be unable to refute the statement, and he didn't.	"It is kind of you," he said to the Colonel, "but won't it bore you ? You're a recluse, I know."	"It will be a great pleasure. I've not been a recluse from choice. What I mean is-.--' the Colonel lowered his voice, Once he had discovered Jarvis was listening at the door, "I'm drifting into bad habits. It's not good for a man to be alone. It will be a real kindness on your part if you'll come and rout me out. I'm always in between tea and dinner." (How did the Colonel know the Major was then at his weakest ?) "Or after dinner.''	The Colonel was as much astonished to find himself saying all this as the Major was to hear it and as for Jarvis, who was listening at the door, the expletive he used was so fierce that the cat, who was creeping across the hall without any particular object in view save, perhaps, that of finding a peaceful spot in which to hide herself from Jarvis, leapt up the stairs in terror.	So the Major began to "drop in.' There were times when lie came in a woolly condition : when his feet and legs seemed like hits of blanket without feeling, and his head a curious empty globular lump having no connection with the rest of his anatomy.	Then the Colonel, without any comment, would put him in a comfortable chair or on a couch, and lie would fall asleep; and when he awoke, his head, which now unfortunately did seem to belong to him, was full of an aching pain, a pain only rivalled in its intensity by the shame at his heart, and he was unable to meet the Colonel's eye till a cup of strong, black82	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEcoffee, which was always ready at hand, whatever the hour, siniueriog away in a covered iron-stone jug on the hob, put new life into him and helped him to stammer out his thanks and his gratitude.	Thus the winter months passed Major Charrington ministering to his wife, tenderly, patiently, but without hope ; and Colonel \\'yckham ministering to the Major, pluckily (often in deadly fear of Jarvis, but never yielding), patiently and full of hope. The Major's "lapses" were becoming less frequent, his visits to the Spiders" fewer. No longer did the Colonel feel it incumbent 01)00 him to he hanging around the Green at ten o'clock of a morning, ready to pounce upon the Major and march him off to a tea-shop or to Ormood Road. He began to trust him. He did not lecture him, he did not revile him. I He helped the frail and physical side of him with coffee, foodand warmth ; and the soul of him with sympathy and faith.	And presently a day came when Major Charrington knew himself to be an absolutely sober man.	"I shall never be able to repay you, Wyckham, I-" He stopped, the old Colonel had used a strong expression beneath his breath."You don't want thanks ?""No."May I shake your hand ?"	"Well, you can do that," but the words were said grudgingly.	Major Charrington laughed; then he wrung the other man's hand till he winced.	"Some day," he said, "I shall be given the opportunity of repaying you. I know it. I feel it in my bones. I'm Irish on my mother's side. Some of us Irish possess the gift of divination.''"Bosh," said Colonel \VyckharV."It's true," said Major Charrington.And his words were fulfilled.VT	Mrs. Charrington died eon Elfie's sixteenth birthday. Her end came -quietly. By small and almost imperceptible steps her hold on life slackened.	First, there was the day when she was too weak to arrange the boudoir cap of lace above her once beautiful hair-now so dull and lifeless, and she fell back upon her pillows, weeping at being beaten. To Rifle's assurance that she looked much sweeter without it (and the rakishness of that lace and beribboned cap above the rouged and wasted face had hurtAN UNDRE55EI) HEROINE	83Elfie and her father physically) she paid no heed, but lay with her eyes closed while the tears trickled down her cheeks.	Then, a night came when her hands fumbled so in putting her hair into wavers, that perforce she had to drop them on to the counterpane. Elfie had always admired the deft movements of her mother's hands as she wove the long strands of burnished hair in and out of the tortoise-shell, and still more the result next morning, when soft undulating waves lay above her white forehead ; and she knew that things were bad indeed when this nightly performance had to be abandoned.	Finally the rouge and powder boxes were pot away. Mrs. Charrington was past using them, but not past caring ye! at their disuse. The room had to be darkened before the doctor's visit, blinds lowered. She must not be seen by the full light of day and when he had gone she lay with her face to the wall till evening came.	And then, at last a moment came, a blessed moment to herself and her nurses, when she no longer cared how she looked. She gave in. The disease had beaten her. She had made a game struggle, but she was finished. All the old admirers of her young and beautiful days might have stood, while the light from a hundred electric lamps beat upon her, and gazed upon her wasted features without her flinching.	This life was ended for her, and slowly she slipped away into the other-whether to oblivion or light she appeared not to care. She had never been a religious woman, and she made no pretence at the end. Major Charrington, who had vague and groping longings for a "Something" divine, "Something" to help to make a better man of him, and, above all, a "Something" to thank for the gift of his Elfie, wondered if she would like to see a clergyman, to hear "a hit" of the Bible, or a hymn, or receive Communion, but he was too shy to suggest it. And she "went out" alone, unhelped, and with an awful look of sadness on her face. She had always been selfish so she had never been really happy.	When it was all over Major Charrington-he had been alone with his wife-went to Elfie's room (it was three o'clock in the morning) and wrapping himself in a rug lay down on a couch near to the bed. He felt a need of human companionship, to touch something alive and warm after contact with the cold hand of the dead woman in the room above. Lightly he laid a hand on one of Elfie's, which was thrown above her headshe always lay thus. She stirred in her sleep but she did not wake. Softly he enfolded it. Then he, too, slept.	84	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEBooi< [IELFIE AND HER LOVERSCHAPTER IA GARDEN-PARTY AT CHOLMONDELEY COURTWISTARIA TERRACE basked in the sunshine, The residents of Nos. 5, 2, 3, and lowered the sun-blinds above the balconies of their drawing-room windows, and No. 2 said those of Nos. I and 3 were shabby and badly needed washing. No. 3, with a toss of its head, said one was unprepared for such grilling weather in May, and No. i didn't care, it was too busy enjoying the delightful sunshine.	Let us take a glance at No. 1. Five years have flown since we saw it last, and during the interval its front door and windows have had a fresh coat of white paint, the wistaria over the walls and balcony is still more rampant in its growth, its great root and branches, in their straining effort after room, actually lifting the square slab of a step quite perceptibly on one side, much to the Major and Elfie's quiet delight, and causing Miss Doyle to sniff as she surveys her own unsloping step and neatly walled house, while saying to her brother	'There's no accounting for taste give me a tidy looking place and a steady step, and if their wistaria comes wandering over our pipes and roof and windows I shall tear it down."	But the wistaria knew better. It continued to lift its own step and flagged path leading down to the gate which opened on to the terrace, and to festoon its mauve blossom in a tangle of loveliness around the door, windows, and balconies of No. z alone.	In a crack to the right of the step caused by the vagaries of the wistaria some ants had colonized, and spent their time when the day was fine and the sun hot in crawling in a thin black line straight across the step to the other sidenobody could ever discover why. Bridget was for removing them with a bucket of boiling water, but the Major and Elfie would not hear of it. They loved their ants, and stepped across the black line as carefully as they would have stepped across a string of pearls.	"Such nonsense!" Bridget pronounced it, and made a terrific onslaught with her pail and bucket each morning,AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	85scattering the little insects to right and left ; but in five minutes they were back, as busily crawling as ever.	The garden was neater than of old. The thin strip of bed was ablaze with yellow and bronze wallflowers; the lawn consisted of more grass and fewer plantains and dandelions; indeed, El fie and the Major were death on the weeds these days, and as each was removed with a screw-driver a dab of lawn seed was patted into the orifice created, and now quite a small sheet of emerald green velvetiness rewarded their efforts.	The little iron gate, which was extraordinarily heavy for so small a thing (the builders of Georgian houses, though not always artistic, designed their houses and the appurtenances thereof to last till the Day of judgment), still stuck and groaned-but quite a pleasant groan-and necessitated an occasional oiling with a long feather, which either Bridget or the Major performed when they thought of it, or the sounds became too pronounced.	The river, and Bridge of Delight, and the three Islands were much as of old. The poplars, perhaps, on The Beloved Isle were a trifle taller, and the weeping willows drooped a little more weepily above the water, and the swans had nested there this season instead of on Duck-of-an-Isle ; but, for the rest, it had changed little.	The river still overflowed the banks at high tide during the heavy rains of winter, and the residents of Wistaria Terrace were frequently marooned from the rest of the world till the tide had receded. This marooning lasted but half-an-hour or so, and occasioned the Major and Elfie quite a pleasurable sensation. They would stand on the Terrace watching the water surging below and washing the base of their steps, while the islands disappeared slowly from view, only the bare branches of their trees sticking out above the swift stream. An old gentleman who lived in a small white round house between the Terrace and Cholmondeley Court would be getting fussy with his boat. As Elfie said, he always appeared keenly desirous of vacating his premises at the exact moment the tide was at its highest."He may have a train to catch," the Major would suggest.	"Well, then he needn't always fit it in with the tide," Elfie would retort, "it's careless of him."	RIfle was lying on the balcony this lovely afternoon. So was the Major. He was asleep and making soft, spluttering little sounds with his lips. She was awake, and reading some poetry of Rossetti. RIfle's days were never long enough to permit sleep to encroach upon them.Now and then she leant across from her seat and softlyremoved a fly from her father's face, or whisked a small insect away, or peeped over the balcony railing with its tangled mass86	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEof wistaria foliage and pendant blossom at her gay bed 01wallflowers below, or threw an affectionate glance at the Beloved Isle opposite. She looked happy, and she was happy. She was young, and charming to look upon. She loved her father, and she loved another and younger man, and she believed her affection was returned. What more could a girl desireA clock struck three at the Marist Convent down the river.	"Father," she said, "it is time you woke up. It has struck three, and we must go and dress for the Inglebys' gardenparty."''Bother I" said the Major, ''and-I was awake,"She laughed and kissed him.Ii	In sending out invitations for a garden-party in May, Mrs. Inglehy knew she had done a daring thing, but was satisfied that it was a sensible one.	"In June, at my past garden-parties, it has snowed and people have been blue with cold, shivering in their thin party frocks like aspens in a wind," she said to Mr. Inglehy. "In July it has sheeted with rain, and people have arrived looking as though about to embark upon a diving expedition. In August and September, everybody who is anybody without originality flocks to Cramer (Richmond is to he found at Cromer and Sheringham, or Sheringham and Cromer, year after year, just as Liverpool migrates to the Isle of Man or North Wales, and Manchester to Blackpool). So why not a garden-party in May ? In May our Judas tree is out, and it is quite something by way of entertainment to lead people to it and explain that the flowers without any stalks springing straight from the branches are representative of the blood of Judas gushing from the tree. And you can do it, Elwyn. You say it so nicely, and if you tell seventy-five people in turn, it will last you all afternoon. You never quite know how to amuse yourself at garden-parties, and I'm always sorry for you.''Mr. Ingleby thanked her.	Mr. Inglehy by his friends was known first and foremost as a gentleman, the type of old English gentleman almost extinct, with courtly manners and leisured well-bred voice and manner. He collected butterflies and played a better short game than any man of his handicap on the Mid-Surrey links. He had recently "laid down" nine holes for approaching and putting in the fine smooth sweep of turf which at a slight gradient sloped away from his house to the river bank, andAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	87there he spent many happy and absorbed hours in trying to "do" them in i8--one approach and one putt for each hole. Seventeen up to now had been his best score, and he had had champagne for dinner on the night of this achievement.	"If it rains we'll turn it into a Bridge party and have muffins for tea," said Mrs. Ingleby. "I wish Brian was at home. He's so clever in helping people not to be too bored, and beyond being helpful about the Judas tree, you won't be much use.""Thank you," said Mr. lngleby again.	Mrs. Ingleby laughed and squeezed his arm. They were very good friends were Mr. and Mrs. Inglehy.	"Oh, I forgot," she added, "there'll be the approaching and putting this year. That will be a godsend to the elderly men."	"No elderly men will approach on my lawn," said Mr. Ingleby. "They would take divots. They would forget it is a lawn, and that for a short-approach- -locking-the-door' -shot, divots need not be taken. I allowed Mr. Bull to try, and he took a piece of turf the size of-of a five-shilling piece -the blighter."	Shocked at the warmth of the expression, Mrs. Ingleby went into the house.III	Elfie looked into her wardrobe and wondered what she should wear.	There was a new hobble hanging there (for it was the spring of 1912, when skirts were at their ugliest and tightest), which Elfie greatly disliked. Madame Elise on the Green (Miss Jones in private life) had insisted upon this hobble, hinting darkly that she should be compelled to cease to work for Miss Charrington unless she would give her more scope. That people, the gentry of Richmond, knew that she, Madame Elise, made for Miss Charrington, and-they talked.	"But I'm the one who needs the scope," said Elfie a little fretfully. She endeavoured to stretch her lissom young limbs, and-split.	"You're not supposed to do that." Madame Elise with difficulty suppressed a shriek as she saw her careful tacking threads rent in twain.	"I can't stand still for the rest of my life" argued Elfie doggedly.	"Mong du I" Madame Elise, who had once been to Paris for twenty-four hours for thirty-two shillings, believed in being French when she could, and when she remembered.88	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	'Don't you ever want to be in the fashion, Miss Charrington, like other young ladies? And you, with such a lovely slim figure."	"No," replied Elfie. "Not if I've to feel and look like this.""Look like that I" Madame Ruse was deeply offended."It's perfect. The gown is lovely. So chick.""That's just it-a chick with no room to hatch.'	Madame Elise was distinctly shocked, and thought Miss Charrington not a little coarse.	In the end each had yielded a point. Rifle an inch, the modiste an inch. The result, a dress sufficiently uncomfortably tight to be in the prevailing fashion, minus the prevailing indecency.	This gown, which was of pale cerise, a colour winch suited RIfle abominably, was, of course, the one she ought to wear this afternoon. It was new, it was fashionable, it was ugly, and it was unknown to the Richmond people. Yet she hankered after a yellow ninon which hung on the next hookone of last year's, but pretty-artistic in colour, and roomy and comfortable in make.	'1 shall wear the ninon," she at length decided. 'The afternoon is hot, and I cannot and will not be circumscribed in my movements like a hobbled goat. I want to do things and enjoy myself." Defiantly she got into the yellow dress, donned a very unmodish black hat, and descended the stairs serene in spirit and unfettered in body.	Her father awaited her in the hail. He was looking anxious. Like RIfle, he was not "dressy". The crease in his grey flannel trousers had somehow got in the wrong place."Do you think it matters ?" he asked.She said "No", though it made his legs a queer shape."Shape ?""A bit Mr. Bonnety.He did not understand."Gothic Archy," she explained."Oh," he said ruefully.	She patted his arm and led him through the front door. "It does not matter, dear," she said, "because your face is so nice,"	And that was what lie felt about her. Instinctively he knew she was not smart, up-to-date. lie couldn't have explained what was wrong, but there it was. She didn't look like the girls he met about the streets of Richmond. About her was a quaint, old-fashioned air, but her face I The sweetness of it, the charm. And the elfish look was still there, the elusiveness; and the soft electric springness of her hair still sent it in cloudy little curly masses about her ears and temples.AN	UNDRESSED hEROINE		ScMajor Charringtou thought it an enchanting face. So did1-Iumphry. So did Mrs. Tugleby, and it was the more enchanting because Elfic was so unaware of its loveliness.	She, too, was a little anxious. "Your crease is wrong," she said, as they walked along the Terrace, "and I'm afraid my frock is. Do you think it looks very-well-dernode ?"	"I don't think it's quite right, my yellow chicken, but what matters ? We're going to enjoy ourselves. And what you ought to wear you can't, because of all the humans who wouldn't understand.''''Tell me," said Elfie. "There's nobody listening.'	"Well, your frock should be composed of the petals of a sunflower.""How pretty," said Elfie.	"And your shoes should be beech husks. And your hat a brown mushroom, and your veil, if you wore one, should be a gossamer spider's web-the kind we meet veiling the gorse hushes on dewy September mornings."	'How sweet, and I believe that's Rosamond in front of us, and it is.,' They called to her to wait for them. Rosamond Arkwright was a tall, handsome girl with generous lines, which, in her extremely tight, thin, pink gown, were so generously displayed that the Major gave a slight gasp; he believed (in the first instant) her to be without stockings-so thin and transparent were the pink ones she'd assumed. She gave Elfie a quick appraising glance (so common amongst women) as they shook hands, and in that glance learnt every detail of her toilet, from the ordinary black-knobbed hat-pin (which, by the way, was much too long) securing her ordinary hat to her head, to the suspicion of torn lace petticoat peeping from beneath the hem of her skirt.	Rosamond thought it was a pity "nice old Elfie always just missed it," and complacently surveyed her own perfect pcrson. In an undertone she acquainted RIfle with the unpleasant fact of the torn petticoat. "You must do something," she said "Have you got a pin ?"	Elfie replied that she had. She remained quite calm and unruffled, and requested that the others should walk on while she put it right. She rejoined them in a moment.	They had reached the river gate of Cholmondeley Court, which the Major and Elfie always used in their visits to the Inglehys, and were turning in as usual, when Rosamond stopped them.	"Oughtn't we to use the main entrance today in Wardrobe Court ?'' she asked. "Wouldn't it be polite and more correct as it's a party ?""Not at all," said the Major.'Oh no," said Elfie. "They'd be amazed if we went any90	AN UNDRESS ED HEROINEother way than this. Oh, how lovely the place looks.' She had opened the gate and passed in.	But-" said Rosamond, Secretly she wanted to make an ''entrance''. She had heard that morning that Brian had unexpectedly turned up from abroad-where he'd been wandering for a year or more-on the previous evening, and Rosamond was interested in Brian Ingleby."Come along," said Elfie. The Major waited for Ro.samond '5to pass through, but she still lingered."Did you know," she inquired. "that Brian returned lastnight"Brian returned I'' RIfle stood stock still.	"Yes, quite unexpectedly. And-1 believe I can see him on the portico steps . . . . The man in grey leaning against the pillar. No, to the right."	Rifle looked down the long vista of grass where many groups of people were already dotted about, and through the blossoming trees to the old house, and though from that distance she was unable to distinguish Brian's features, she recognized that the figure, with its careless, easy pose against the pillar, was his-and suddenly a wave of colour swept into her cheeks.	Rifle Charrington had always loved Brian Ingieby, loved him since she'd been little more than a baby. Her love for him had been part of her life. Yet this was the first time she had blushed at seeing him.	She went shy and a little trembly. And of a sudden she felt she could not walk down that long stretch of grass with his and other eyes upon her. "There-are a lot of people about," she said "apparently we are late. Perhaps, after all, we'd better go by Wardrobe Court. Nobody has seen us."	Quick to seize the opportunity, delighted at the prospect after all of making a correct entrance, of being "announced", of passing from the lounge hall through the long french windows to the steps of the portico where so many people were clustered, and who would see her and her pretty pink frock and pink ankles and white shoes to the best advantage, Rosamond made a turning movement for the towing-path. But the Major would have none of it. His party shoes were tight, there was sharp gritty gravel on the towing-path along which they would have to proceed to gain Wardrobe Court. Here was velvety turf, and here were cool trees, and here was that lovely and satisfying aspect the old house wore when approached from the river, with little halts and pauses, to enable the mellowed charm of its ancient walls, chimney stacks, and the little round window in the pediment above the pillared portico, slowly to sink into the senses."No," he said. "And" (with unexpected perception, forAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	91he was not quick in his understanding of women, he divined the reason of Rosamond's keenness for the other way) "think of the sensation you'll cause as you advance across the grass with this setting of green. At first a pink butterfly, then an animated pink azalea, gradually materializing into a pink and perfect young woman." He looked at Elfie in a sly asidethey had their own little jokes relative to the vanity of Rosamond. "But I must walk between the two of you, the pink and yellow butterflies must not clash. Come along."	To Elfie it seemed that the space to be covered before the house could be gained had extended alarmingly: it appeared like an expanding telescope, and her eyes were bent upon the ground. She withheld her speech, trying to gain control of her foolish nerves and senses. She was annoyed with herself. What was the meaning of her irregularly beating heart ? Was it that though she had always loved Brian she had only just made the discovery that she was in love with him, and there is a world of difference between the two ? "So idiotic of me," she thought, "and before all these people."	The Major, noting her silence (so unusual), suddenly perceived that his little yellow butterfly's wings were a trifle droopy; indeed, very droopy in comparison with the triumphant pink fiutterings of the other, and that the hand which held a somewhat rusty parasol was actually trembling. What did it mean ? With a father's quick protective instinct he drew the slim arm and hand free of the parasol through his own, and gave it a reassuring squeeze. He didn't know what was the matter, but something was up. Was she conscious that she was not so smartly dressed as Rosamond (he thanked God for it, by the way), or was she determined not to see Humphry Doyle, whose eyes devoured her-he was standing alone a little removed from a group of chattering people in the shade of a cedar tree-as they advanced.	Humphry was deeply, openly, and unashamedly in love with Elfie. He had no eyes, nor ears, nor speech for anyone else when she was present, and she cared no more for him, the Major knew, than she cared for Mr. Winks, who was now married to the widow, or for her own silver buttonhook. She was friendly to him and kind. Elfie couldn't help being kind to people, but she treated him as a neighbour, a brother, a friend-anything but a lover.	She responded to the pressure of her father's arm and at once regained her composure.IBrian came down the steps to meet them with both handsI92	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEextended to Elfie. His chief attraction to her and to women generally was his unaffectedness. He never posed, and a lack of pose in a good-looking young man, rich and much sought after, is attractive and endearing.	He was unaffectedly glad to see Elfie, and lie said so and made no hones about it. And that others heard him tell her this was a matter of supreme indifference to him,	"I wanted to trot round and see you this morning, but Mother had a thousand and one things for me to do, so I waited." ... There was no mistaking the admiration and affection in his eyes as he looked into her flushed and vivid face. Yet . . a little shiver of disappointment ran through her. She was glad he was glad to see her, but she could have wished he had been a little less openly glad. He was so frank, so friendly, so almost brotherly. He could not have been more unembarrassed with a maiden aunt.	Now-he was saying nearly the same things to Rosamond, and she turned away, disappointment gripping at her heart.	''There is Mrs. Ingleby, Father,'' she said, ''and Mr. Ingleby. We must make our respects to them." They began to ascend the steps to the french windows of the hall where Mrs. Ingleby was receiving.	"Conic back,' called Brian, "when you've spoken to the mater. We're having tea all over the place. There's a table in the little old summer-house by the river, our summer-house, RIfle. I want you to have tea there with me, will you ?"-he took out his watch-"say in a quarter of an hour. I must," in an undertone, "be polite to everybody first."	Elfie's heart lifted. She did not speak, but her eyes answered in the affirmative. When had she ever refused him anything?	Mrs. Ingleby was in gay and happy mood, her son had returned, and she had overheard his invitation to RIfle RIfle, she thought, was the nicest girl in the world.	"My dear," she whispered, "I've got a Mayor here from the North. Can you do anything with him? He looks unhappy.""I'll try," said RIfle.	"Just for a quarter of an hour. Take him to the seat beneath the may-tree and let him talk to you. You needn't respond, all you've to do is to allow him to explain things to you."	"Very well." RUle would have allowed a cannibal to talk to her, if he had been safe.	She led the Mayor to the may-tree and seat, which commanded a good view of the whole pretty and animated scene -the women in their gay frocks grouped about beneath the lovely drooping laburnums in full flower, the splendid old house with its serene air of having seen many things, theAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	93yew walk-dark-some and romantic, in which tradition said Antic J3oleyn had wandered in the days preceding the removal of her poor unhappy head.	Elfie loved the place She knew it inside and out, its every stick and stone. How many times had she not sat and peopled it with those who had helped to make history, for with its historical side she was as intiniate as was the librarian of the Richmond Free Library, which was saying much. Therefore she was not a little surprised (though of course, as she told herself afterwards, how could he know she knew these things ?) when the Mayor announced ponderously and without preamble and with a wide and circling wave of his very Mayoral arm and hand towards the house, for lie prided himself on his culture and knowledge of history "That was built in the reign of Queen Anne on the original foundation of the ancient Palace of Sheen."	"Really P' said Elfie. His voice was so Mayoral and informing that how could she tell him she'd known it since she was six	""Yes,'' said the Mayor. 'The Old Palace was very inagirificent, very magnificent it was Tudor." He seemed to iike the word, for lie dwelt upon it, and added "Pure Tudor. It extended from Asgill House down the river from here as far as Friar's Lane up the river-possibly you may not be acquainted with Friar's Lane 1'"I've seen it," said Elfie guardedly.	"So you can judge of its size and magnificence. Here in these very grounds, kings and queens and cardinals walkedHenry the Eighth, Anne of Cleves, who resided in the Palace after her-her----" Ought lie to touch upon so delicate a subject as divorce to so young a girl P "Unhappy estrangement with the King."	"Divorce it was," said Elfie, wishing to be helpful. She thought the Mayor might have muddled up Anne with one of the other wives and was doubtful as to whether she'd really been beheaded, but being a Mayor refused to betray his ignorance.	The Mayor looked down his nose, which was shaped like a banana. He was unused to prompting or correction of any kind, and thought his companion was forward. But he continued-not for nothing had he at some pains got up the History of the Old Palace that very morning "Here also walked the great Wolsey. After his presentation of Hampton Court Palace to Henry, the King as a small return lent the Cardinal his palace at Richmond. But he was not happy here-the Richmond people were unfriendly and called him 'the son of a butcher'. Then there were Edward the Sixth, Mary, Elizabeth. Elizabeth"-the Mayor pausedI94	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEto blow his nose on a very clean large white handkerchief, and Elfie snatched the opportunity to wonder to whom her father was talking so animatedly on the other side of the lawn, and whether Humphry, who looked terribly bored, was being rude to a vivacious and very sporty lady who would make him play clock-golf with her; and how much of the fifteen minutes had elapsed prior to her joining Brian for tea in the summer-house. Active preparations were already on foot for tea. The old butler and a host of servants were crossing and recrossing the lawn with trays to dozens of small tables dotted about beneath the trees and by the river. There were only the teapots to come. "So sensible," thought Elite, 'not to be herded together in the house, or in a tent, treading on each other's toes, spilling tea down each other's backs, getting nothing to eat that we want. Here we can select our own tea-party, and really enjoy ourselves.'"Did you hear what I said ?" asked the Major severely."Oh yes you were speaking of Elizabeth, she-"	"Died in a small chamber-not in this house, for nothing remains of the old Tudor Palace but some underground rooms and some old walls in the garden-"	"Covered with wonderful old fig trees," interposed Elfie. "Have you seen them ?"	"No, I haven't," replied the Mayor crossly. She was interrupting him again. "Elizabeth died in a small chamber to the right of the Archway as you enter Wardrobe Court, or more correctly the 01(1 Palace Yard. The authentic chamber -I was in it myself this morning." The Mayor's tone led Elfie to understand that had there been the slightest doubt hitherto of the authenticity of the great Elizabeth's bedchamber having been in what still remained of the Old Palace of Richmond it was now removed. He, the Mayor, had been into the room. His presence had approved and sanctioned the tradition of her death having taken place within its walls. "She had to die somewhere, so why not there ?" he seemed to say.	"Disraeli"-at a leap he jumped the Stuart and Hanoverian Kings and Queens, for with a practised garden-party eye he saw that sandwiches, cakes, and teapots were coming across the lawn to the tables-' 'Disraeli said in one of his letters that this house, this veritable house and grounds were the most enchanting in England ; and though lie tended to exaggeration, I'm inclined to agree with him"-the Mayor had sighted champagne cup. "That venerable pile with its majestic Tuscan columns-and the sound of the rooks," he waved a benign hand towards the rookery, "and that wonderful old Judas tree-the oldest in England, scattering its pink blossom on to the grass with such prodigality-and the magnificentAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	95plane and chestnut trees, and the velvety turf, and the river shining through the vista of fresh Spring green--the Mayor was working himself up to the end of his peroration--and the people who have wandered here, loved and (lied here, worked and played here, names famous and names perhaps unsung-'"Such as Emma and Alice Belet," interrupted Elfie softly."What ?" asked the Mayor.	''Emma and Alice Belet. I'm always most interested in them, poor things. They couldn't have had much to live upon.""I don't know what you mean," said the Mayor.	"Long before the Tudor palace, there was another here. This particular bit of Richmond has always teemed with palaces, and in the reign of Henry the Third-it was quite a little one then, and was called Richmond Manor-it somehow passed into the hands of one John Belet, and when he died he left it to his daughters Emma and Alice, and his will was deliciously and quaintly worded. For example, the moiety of Emma comprised amongst other things 'A dove-cot'wasn't that nice ?" Elfie had forgotten the Mayor-her eyes had wandered away to the Inglebys' dove-cot-or where she knew the dove-cot to he-a little flagged, walled enclosure warm and sunny. " 'A Several Pasture, a Rabbit Warren, the works of Customary tenants, Pleas and Perquisites of the Lords' Courts, and a Free Fishery, which was valued at one shilling.' I have such a wish to know what was meant by A Several Pasture."	The Mayor, making a slight, queer sound in his throat, recalled her to the fact that he was there sitting on the bench, and that she was supposed to be listening to him, and not he to her. Turning, she looked at him, and saw that he was vexed. "Do you," she asked humbly, trying to propitiate him, "happen to know what A Several Pasture was	"No," he replied firmly, rising, "and I do not see that it is of any importance." Tea was ready. The guests were beginning to assemble at the different tables, and he wished to secure a good seat in the shade, some distance removed from a Mr. Bull, a curate from Kingston, an immense talker, famous for scorching on a motor-bicycle, and still more famous for having evaded the Kingston police traps up to now. The Mayor wished to talk and not to listen he had already made the acquaintance of Mr. Bull. Raising his hat to Elfie, he moved magnificently away.	96	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEV	Ethe' threaded her way in and out of Mr. Ingleby's putting greens to the summer-house.	l-lumplirv, still iii the sporting lady's clutches and with illsuppressed passion, was hanging at a golf hall as though desirous of putting if into the river instead of the ninth hole.	The lady was earnestly endeavouring to show him how to do it.	'But I'm not a golfer-he cast Elfie a piteous look as she passed--and I believe tea is ready."	"So it is," said the lady brightly. "Let us go to that table under the Judas tree, shall we ? I love Judas trees, don't you ?" She bore him away Elfie was sure she caught a muttered expletive.	"Poor Humphry," she thought; "but today I can't be kind. It's so long, so very long since I talked to Brian. And lie's coming to meet me." Her pulses raced. The summerhouse was built on a raised knoll above the river. Steps led up to it, Brian was descending them.	"Come along," he called. "We're waiting for you. Stroud has given us a jolly big pot-just like he used to in the old days. Rosamond has conic, too."	"Oh !" The exclamation of keen disappointment broke from her, but in a flash she recovered herself. Pride makes a woman quick. "So you won't be alone-that's right, for I find I can't have tea with you, after all. I'm so sorry." She smiled up at him as he stood on the steps above her, a pleasant, cool, and friendly little smile-the smile of a sister for a brother.'But why ?' Brian was piqued.'I've so many people who seem to want me.'But I want you.''	"Do you ? That's nice of you. But so does poor Humphry, and he's always miserable at parties, as you know. And there's an instructive Mayor who's been telling me things about this place and there's Father. So good-bye for the present. Will see you later-before we leave."	But, Elfie"-Brian was very aggrieved-"I've such heaps to tell you-"	"It must wait," she cried laughingly over her shoulder. Shiv was moving swiftly away. "Go and look after Rosamond."	When she was hidden from his view in the kindly shelter of the trees-she had branched away to the left to avoid the other guests for a brief space-she checked a hard dry little sob. "And I've waited a year for this," she whispered-,\ N		1 N U	I	S S I	Ii S IL 0 1 N 1:	97'but-1 don't care.'' (It was not for nothing that Bide was a oldier's daughter.) "At any rate, I'm not going to let myself care."vi	And just because she seemed so friendly, so sisterly, so elusive, Brian, in his turn, began to want quite strongly to be alone with her.	Rosamond was charming to look upon. He admired her brightly-burnished, well-groomed hair, he liked the way she did it. He liked her clothes; he thought girls should be up-to-date and smart and follow the prevailing fashion. If the prevailing fashion were ugly it was unfortunate, but should be adopted nevertheless-not that he thought the fashions of 1912 were ugly he liked and admired the tight short skirts, and delicate revelation of slim ankles and prettily moulded limbs. What he did not like was dowdiness.But Rosansond, though so bright, so handsome, so pleasantto flirt with, if one felt in the mood, was not Rifle. Riflehe was used to. She made no demands upon him. She was restful-yet besides being restful she was quickening. She seemed to possess the power of bringing out of him all that was in any way fine or clever or splendid, and it was pleasant to feel any of these things. She was, too, such an excellent listener. She did not break in with irrelevant remarks as Rosamond did-they might be quite amusing remarks, and lie laughed at them, but they were disturbing. When lie was giving Rosamond or anyone else an idea of his sensations on mis first ascent of the Matterhorn, it was disturbing to be asked in the middle if he knew Mr. Doyle had retired from business.	"Mr. Doyle used to be a climber-that's what made me think of it," Rosamond had explained apologetically. But RIfle would never have broken in in such a way. Elfie would have waited to the end. And the more he thought of Elfie's attractive qualities as a listener the more he felt he wanted to talk to her. Moreover, RIfle was herself so amusing and interesting as a talker. Brian didn't always want to talkit was only when he was full of a thing he'd recently been doing-when lie wanted to "let it out" to somebody sympathetic but he was also a good listener and RIfle had amused him ii, the past more than anyone in the world.	From the window of the summer-house he could see what appeared to be a very jolly four having tea together beneath the Judas tree Mr. Bull, the scorching curate who was Irish and full of mother-wit and racy stories Humphry who seemed surprisingly lively; a lady in a sporting check costume D98	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEwith whose name Brian was unacquainted and Elfie herself. So these were the people who had so urgently wanted her. Mr. Bull, a man from Kingston without any claim; Humphry, who lived next door to her and whom she could see all the year round, and a woman who looked well able to take care of herself at any party. And he, Brian, had been abroad for over twelve months. He felt aggrieved, hurt. He did not care, he told himself. If Elfie preferred these people to himself-.-but-aftcr his long absence and after their lifelong friendship. Perhaps . . . suddenly he brightened. Elfie was so kind always, so unselfish. She might really have wanted to help old Humphry. Humphry was shy, or said lie was, a recluse, more like a hermit-crab than a young man of twentyseven in the Civil Service, who, seeing that he vent up to London every day and sat in trains, and lunched in crowded restaurants, and did things-Brian didn't know what they were, but it was something to do with the Admiralty, which things would some day (when he was sixty) secure him a nice pension-he had no right to be shy. And if he did give way to shyness, he had no right to bring it to garden-parties, where he knew he would have to knock up against strangers. It wasn't fair or right. Kind Elfie was probably being bored to tears. He glanced through the window hopefully, to confirm his belief in her boredom.	A peal of laughter came across the lawn and seemed to strike both his ear-drums like a blowIt was Elfie who had laughed.VIIHe went round to Wistaria Terrace after dinner.	It was simply the resumption of an old habit, he told himself, for frequently in the past he had joined the Major in an after-dinner smoke when there was nothing special "on" to amuse him at home.	He found father and daughter seated on the balcony drinking their coffee, and watching innumerable small river craft returning in the fading light, fiannelled young men and airy-frocked pretty girls.	From the little garden below delicious scents of wet wallflowers-for RIfle and the Major, at the conclusion of their simple dinner, each armed with a watering-can, had given the borders a prodigious soaking-were wafted up on the still air. The Bridge of Delight, Elfie had just remarked, was a Bridge of Dreams tonight for a soft, pinkish-it was scarcely white-ethereal and very lovely mist hung about the five arches through which the little boats kept creeping.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	99	Elfie had changed from the yellow frock into a soft white muslin, cut low at the throat; it was two or three years old, and had certainly seen its best days, but in the dim light its imperfections were not visible, and she looked very alluring with her unruly cloudy hair straying about her head against a white cushion.	Her work (ironholders for Bridget) lay on a table at her side-the evening was sufficiently still to admit of a lamp being brought presently to the balcony-which she was manufacturing from an old check waistcoat of her father's, a waistcoat she had peculiarly liked, and therefore decided to perpetuate in ironholders, ironholders at the moment being Bridget's strongest need.	She expressed surprise at Brian's visit, while offering him a cool little hand.	"Why, it only seems a moment since we left you," she smiled."It is three hours," said he."Really, it doesn't seem so long.",Major	Charrington gave a little cough. He thought Elfie somewhat inhospitable.	"We're delighted to see you, my boy, aren't we, Effie? It seems years since we had a crack together. Have some coffee 1'	"I've had it, thanks. Sorry if I'm in the way." Brian looked at Elfie reproachfully.	"You're not a bit," Elfie assured him, "at least you won't be when you sit down. Bridget is waiting to pass with the lamp. Thank you. Won't you have your old place? The balcony has not expanded since you left, it still won't hold three chairs.''	Brian squatted down on the big satin footstool she pushed towards him.	'I came really to see if you'd go out a bit with me in the punt," he said. "It's such a ripping night."	She shook her head. 'Sorry, but I can't leave my ironholders.''"But-they could wait, surely."	"No," said she, "Bridget must have one ready for her ironing on Monday."	'Wouldn't a duster do, or any old bit of rag," the Major suggested helpfully. He didn't know what had come tolie'Can't be done. I promised Bridget. She'd think I'dIdeTi faith with her.''	But you can buy one for a penny," argued the Major. "I've seen them.""Not fashioned from your old waistcoat, darling." Deftly100	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEElfie was cutting the check cloth into squares. 'The ironholders you buy on Hill Rise or in George Street are invariably made out of black cloth ; (11111 black cloth depresses Bridget. She is of that mercurial Irish temperament which is depressed by things like black cloth. Were I to present Bridget with a black cloth ironholder, 1 can easily conceive her bursting into tears over the ironing-board."	The Major stared at his daughter. FIer mood was new to him, and she had drunk of nothing but water at her dinner. Brian kicked at the iron railing of the balcony ; he felt disappointed and irritated. Elfie had not been so airy and inaccessible since the days of the codfish trouble. He wanted to tell her of his travels. He had written to her, of course, during the year, long chatty letters. He prided himself on his epistolary powers, but letters were not talking. When he wrote lie was unable to see the sympathy, the absorbed interest on RIfle's speaking face, to feel her receptivity, her quickness to seize a point, to hear her soft understanding murmurs, and low laugh of enjoyment. He wanted to tell her now, out there on the dreaming river with scents of hawthorn and chestnuts and the fresh growth of spring about them, of what he had seen and done in his year's wandering of his exploits in mountain climbing, his fishing in Lake Orta, his golfing at Ravenna and Axenstein, his mooning along the waterways in Venice, the churches and pictures he had seen in Venice. Of Venice lie felt lie could have talked well and interestingly tonight, as they crept up the river in the puntand the moon was rising now-RIfle lying, a white, attractive figure at one end with her dark head against his embroidered cushions, and he softly paddling at the other. They could have moored at Eel Pie Island, or if the island had been noisy and congested with other moored boats, they could have paddled up to the weir at Teddington. And then he could have told her of Venice.	And she talked of ironholders He had returned after a year's absence, and so little, apparently, had she missed him that instead of jumping, as she had jumped of old, at accompanying him on the river, she preferred to sit at home and make ironholders. It was incredible, preposterous, almost rude	He got up suddenly, spurning the black footstool with an angry font."Aren't you coming ?" he asked."No, Brian.""\Vhy not ?"Elfie raised her eyebrows. "I've told you. Ironholders.""Damn the irnnholders !" said Brian, very clearly andemphatically, but to himself. He did not swear before women.IAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	101'then, with a good-night to both, but without shaking hands, he flung himself from the balcony into the drawing-room, and down the stairs before Major Charrington could rise from his chair to show him out.	The Major sat in perplexed silence for fully a couple of minutes, following the sound of Brian's footsteps along the Terrace and down to the river, then he drew a surprised breath as one who had knocked up against something totally unexpected.	Elfie smiled to herself, as with a long, firm darning needle she buttonholed together several thicknesses of the check cloth. "What dear simple things men were," she mused. "So like the baby of the well-kiiown advertisement who wasn't happy till he got it--then (if the picture could have been continued into "a next") dropping it, Elfie could have sworn, the ordinary piece of soap, for a nice little tin duck that had loomed happily and unexpectedly on the horizon of the bath. This afternoon she had been the piece of soap Brian had dropped her for the impeccable tin duck, (Rosamond's pink stockings, Elfie believed, had been the crowning attraction.) The duck perhaps had not quacked so nicely as Brian would have liked, quacked too noisily, had not listened to him; and then, apparently and surprisingly, other people wanted the soap, his soap. How dare they ? The soap was his. (Did he know this ? Had she shown her heart too plainly through the years ?) She blushed in the shadow cast by the lamp, but she was happy. Brian had shown that he desired her.She slipped a hand into her father's and gave it a squeeze.	I don't understand you, Elfie," he said. "I thought you were the only female thing in the world who u'as understandable and-I find I'm mistaken.""Poor Father!" said she softly"Don't you like Brian now ?""Yes, Father.""Don't you want to go with him ?"'Yes, Father,"'Then why in Heaven's name didn't you ?""If I told you, you wouldn't understand.""Why not? Am I a fool ?""No, darling, but you're a-man."Major Charrington gave it up.102	AN UNDRESSED HEROINECHAPTER IIIN WHICH ELFIE LEARNS THE TRUTH; AND HERSELFTELLS AN UNTRUTHTHEY were seated on that delightful hit of Wimbledon Common -the Kingston Vale end-which is so unspoiled and which might, from its peace and freedom from human beings, be hundreds of miles from London.	They had motored over from Richmond in Brian's twoseater car with their tea. RIfle was still great at picnics.	The tea was spread on the ground in the shade of a lime tree. Indeed, the picnic had been arranged to fit in with the blossoming of this particular lime tree, which RIfle had known and loved for many years. It had meant waiting till July, of course-even lime trees, sweet and friendly and kind as they are to their special friends, can't bustle up and flower before their appointed time, just to please a man and a girl.	'You must drink your tea beneath other trees till I am ready," said the lime tree on Wimbledon Common, "but when you do come I'll see that you have a fine day, and I'll turn on my very best scent for you, and invite all the bees of the neighbourhood to come and sing part-songs amid my blossom."And it kept its word.	Elfie, from her kneeling position (she was pouring out), kept pausing to tilt up her head to the canopy of leaves and clusters of flowers above her, to sniff and to listen."There are millions of them," she said."What ?"	"Bees." They must have been pleased at the lilt in her voice."There are lots of limes on the Green, and-bees."	"Yes, but we can't sit beneath them to drink our tea. It's too public, and if Mr. and Miss Doyle saw us, were we so greatly daring, they'd be shocked."	"Do them good," said Brian lazily. He lay on his back, gazing now at the intense blue of the summer sky, and then at RIfle, as she busied herself with the cups and saucers. She wore a gown of green linen, and round her neck was a string of brown carved beads. She had removed her hat (a shabby old affair, Brian thought it), and the sun, glinting through the branches of the lime, seemed to rest with pride and delight onAN		UNDRESSEI)	HEROINE	103the richness of her neck and check, tinted a most delicious warm brown after long days spent in the open. Her eyes were full of tenderness when veiled from Brian, and of laughter, mockery, challenge, when raised to his. "His \Vood-Elf", her father called her when she donned the green linen frock (sun-faded in places) and the brown, quaint beads, and brown mushroom hat, which lay on the turf beside her, and lie would sing to her of Hose Marie and Peter Bumblebee, whom she had never quite outgrown. But Brian, who admired the elfin sweetness of her face and her masses of dusky, curly hair (badly though she did it), was displeased with the rest of her appearance. Why would Elfie insist upon wearing such queer, old-fashioned, dull clothes ? He liked white and delicate pinks and blues and mauves in the summer, such as other girls affected. Was it because she was indifferent or couldn't afford it ? It didn't mailer, of course, because Elfie was Elfie; but still-girls should make the best of themselves, if not for their own sakes, for the sake of the people who were fond of them.	RIfle, through the weeks that had elapsed since the day of the garden-party, had been learning to love Brian more and more; but she was, as yet, uncertain that he loved her in return. She hoped and prayed that he did, but the slight doubt and uncertainty were there, and until they were removed by a word from him, all that lay in her own heart must be hidden from his knowledge. Bridget had once described Elfie as "terrible proud". The very idea of revealing her love to a man till he had asked for it filled her with horror. Pursuit of a man aroused her scorn and disgust. Some girls she knew were willing to meet men two-thirds of the way. Not one-third would she permit herself. All the suggestions for river expeditions, walks, fishing, runs in the car, came from Brian. She was acquiescent; pleased to fall in with his plans, so long as her father's entertainment had been arranged for, but she was never the one to propose them. If he failed to call round at Wistaria Terrace for several days, she never sought him. She fretted at his absence, but he never knew it.	Humphry was envious of the intimate terms to which Brian was admitted, but he was not jealous. How could he be jealous when he heard her talk to him as though she were his aunt ? He little knew the wild heart-heats those practical words were concealing. That Elfie was acting a part he would not have believed, and would have understood still less that love can endow the simplest woman with a sixth sense.	"Here is your tea and-I have done all the work," she grumbled, but she was only pretending. She loved to wait on him.Brian sat up and took the cup and a shrimp sandwich104	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEfrom her. "I lighted the stove. It's a woman's privilege to make tea for men," he retorted."Oh, is it ?'' she replied.	'Would you like to make tea br Humphry ?' he suddenly asked.	"For Humphry ? Why ?" She looked surprised at the question."Why ? Because he's in love with you, of course."	Blue started, spilling some of the contents of her cup over her dress, while a bright colour dyed her cheeks.'Didn't you know it ?" Brian asked her teasingly."1 don't know, and if 1 did, I would rather not discuss it,"	She dabbed with her handkerchief at the tea she had spilled. Never before in all the intimacy of their companionship had Brian touched upon the subject of love, a subject rarely absent for long from the tte-a-&ö* conversation of young men and women who know each other at all well. It is such an interesting topic-this love. When discussing it one enjoys the exciting sensation of skating on thn ice. The man and woman may not necessarily be in love with each other, but they enjoy talking about it. Some day it will, in all probability, come to them, this wonderful thing. and speculation about it is of absorbing interest.	But to Brian and Elfie it had been as a sealed book; and now the man referred to it (and in relation to the girl) as lightly and unmindingly as he might have referred to the beauty of the day, or the proposed purchase of a set of new tyres for his car.	He saw her surprise and the colour that had rushed to her cheeks, and wondered at it. It was foolish of her to mind his reference to old Humphry's affection, which was so patent to all the world-a very mole would have seen it.He bent forward and patted her hand affectionately.	"Sorry," he said. "But I took it as a matter of course that you knew I knew. Humphry's always cared for you, but of late he's been growing a pitiable object, and each day he becomes a greater curmudgeon and ruder to his friends. I'm sorry for the chap-you know.""Are you ?" said Elfie icily.	"Yes," said Brian, "and you're so nice to him it only makes it worse if you don't mean to have him."	"Nice to him ? What do you mean ?" Elfie's anger was rising.	"Well, kind, sympathetic, interested in his books and work. Draw him out of his shell.''	"I'm sorry for Humphry. He has a pretty rough time. His uncle and aunt are cold, calculating people, as selfish as they are made. He has never known awe affection; he's hadAN UNDRESSED	III- RuINE	105a starved life. If I'm kind to Humpliry it's because I pity him." From the note in Elfie's voice Brian might have divined he'd gone far enough but he blundered on.	"And don't they say pity is akin to love? i-' He stopped. Elfie had sprung to her feet and her eyes were flashing. 'How dare you discuss the relations between Humphry and myself, and cross-question me? What right have you ?"Brian stared. He was amazed Such temper in Elfie	"Oh, I say," he began. "I didn't know it would vex you. i thought we told each other everything. We always have. I'd tell you if I'd a love affair on hand, tell you like a shot. I'm sorry, old girl do sit down again." He got up and forced her gently back to her seat. "I'm beastly sorry. if I'd thought it would really hurt you I'd have bitten my tongue out before I'd said a word on the ball), subject. There, there"-he was patting her hand as if she had been a naughty, fractious child who needed soothing. "That's better. Say you forgive me, Elfie girl. Don't sulk with me as you did years ago about that codfish remark of mine, for I couldn't bear it. Hanged if I could I"	His face was close to hers, and at the rueful expression in his blue eyes she could not repress a smile and her anger melted. Never could she be angry with Brian for long. But uneasiness which came near to being pain stirred at her heart. He had said: "if I had a love affair on hand I'd tell you like a shot." The words reiterated through her brain. They were very brotherly, very intimate, those words, and full of a cocksureness that his confidences would be received with interest and sympathy by her. Did a man talk like this to a girl he loved ? she pondered. He was chattering on. With characteristic quickness to avoid anything unpleasant he had sheered away from the subject of Humphry. Peace had been restored between them She had remained passively seated where he had placed her. She hadn't flown up again. She hadn't pursued the subject of her annoyance, as some girls would have done. She hadn't "kept on". Elfie was leagues and mountains and oceans superior to most girls. So sensible, so free from feminine inconsistencies, so dependable, in fact. That was her great charm, her dependability. Yet-it had been rather extraordinary, her sudden and quite unexpected anger about Humphry. What did it mean P Did she really care for him P Brian had never dreamt of such an eventuality. llnmphry! Old Humphry; moody, shy, taciturn, nastyI empered, and selfish, like his uncle and aunt. Abominably selfish. Never thought of a living being but himself-unless it were Elfie. Would it be possible for Elfie, with her sweetness, 1(r gaiety, her love of fun and amazing interest in everythingtoO	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEin the universe, to care for a dull man like Humphry ? But stranger things had come to pass. He looked at her, as she sat eating cherry cake, with her eyes on the blue distances. She had become passively quiet. A featherweight of depression seemed to be hovering about the little party. And it settled. They became dull.	Brian, who hated dullness in any woman, and more particularly in Elfie, whose special province, he believed, was to be sprightly and amusing, resented it. They had come out to enjoy themselves; to cat shrimp sandwiches and cherry cake beneath a lime tree-the lime tree for Elfie's benefit-so far as lie was concerned, it might have been a cork treeindeed, the persistent humming of the bees was becoming offensive to his ears. They had come out to talk discursively on many and pleasant subjects. His own career, for example, for slowly but surely he had been working up to this in his own mind ; he must have a career. He could not be a loafer indefinitely, though at one time be had thought he could. He had thought travelling, reading, a bit of sketching-he was really rather clever with his pencil-fishing, golfing, motoring, and all the other games and pursuits that seemed to satisfy the ordinary leisured young man were going to satisfy him; and he had discovered they were not. And, privately, he was rather proud of his discovery. It made him feel heroic. It made him feel he was going to do something. A man who works when he need not was bound, he felt, to do something. And he had meant to tell all this to Elfie this afternoon. She was as yet unaware of his aspirations, of his fine resolve not to be a slacker, and he knew he could count upon her interest when he told her, even upon her pride in him. Elfie was just the sort of girl who would glory in a man (who was her friend) distinguishing himself. And now, just because he had innocently chaffed her about Humphry she had got huffy and vexed, and would sit staring at the horizon as though she saw something frightfully exciting there instead of looking at and being nice to him Brian felt distinctly aggrieved.11	When the tea-things were packed away he asked her if she wanted to go home, and on her replying "Yes" he could not disguise his astonishment. He had not expected her f' reply in the affirmative. He knew how much she had looked forward to the little expedition.	"It's not late," he demurred. He glanced at his watch. 'Why, it's only five o'clock! Need you go ?-I mean, doesAN		LND1t1S1.fl		t1E!ZONN	107\iaJor Charrluhtun want you r Or is it. that you want to goYou're not still vexed with me, are youRifle shook her head.	'Sure? He took her hand for a moment in his and piessed it affectionately, and Elfie turned away to hide the trouble in her eyes. The pressure had been so friendly, so almost step-fatherly.The day was warm but she gave a little shiver.	She felt convinced at that moment that Brian did not love her. A fierce unhappiness assailed her. She did not want to cry, but she did want to he alone, to go home, to get to her own room, to lie with her face down against the pillow and not be seen. That was her strong craving, her overwhelming desire at the moment-not to be seen.	Brian was speaking, and she tried bard to concentrate her attention on what be was saying. He was suggesting they should go for a good spin in the car before returning to Richmond, and passively she yielded.I want to tell you something," he said"Oh," she replied.	"Something in which I think you'll be interested. You like men, approve of men doing some sort of work, don't you, even if they needn't ? Not wasting their lives, frittering their time away ?" He was tucking her into the car. "But I'll tell you when we're off and we come to an easier bit of road."	And he told her. He spent a good hour in telling her all he wanted and meant to do. He was going to be an explorer, and when Elfie, simulating an interest, asked him where and what he was going to explore, he said he didn't know. He hadn't thought it out yet. But there must be heaps of places. The Poles and Thibet and Central Africa and Tartary and the Islands of the Pacific had been done, of course, but he should break fresh ground. He'd not yet made out an itinerary.	As they neared home he said what a jolly drive they'd had, and how ripping it was the way Elfie understood a chap."It would be ripping if you could come, too," be said."Come ?"	"Come and explore with me. You'd make a splendid traveller. We'd make up a party, as I suppose it wouldn't be correct for us to go off alone." He turned and smiled down at her very frankly and nicely. "So we'd get a married couple to act as chaperons, and one or two other fellows."	"Aren't you arranging a party to one of the sports places in Switzerland ?" she asked. "It doesn't sound like stern exploration-losing your life and all that sort of thing. Explorers don't need chaperons as a rule."toS	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	He laughed He was thoroughly enjoying himself Elfie had quite got over her annoyance.	'But, you see, I want you to come," he said in his jolly, bright manner, and he gave her hand a brotherly squeeze as he helped her out of the car.[II	She went straight up to her room to dress for dinner, and sat for a little while on an ottoman in the window with her eyes not on the river or the Beloved Isle (at least she did not see them), but on the future, Deliberately she forced herself to look into a future void of Brian. She sat so still that a little yellow butterfly, which had come in through the open window, settled upon her dress and folded its wings as though making ready for the night. It pleased Elfie to talk to it. Its innocent confidence seemed to touch and warm her heart. She would have liked to stroke its downy folded wings, but knew if she ventured it would flutter away.	"Have you ever been disillusioned, yellow butterfly ?" she whispered. "Ever thought you were going to find sweetness in a flower and discovered only bitterness ? And if you have, what have you done ? Have you pined and fretted, wrung your little slender legs and pretty wings and allowed tears to blind your eyes ? Have you made yourself a perfect nuisance to all the other butterflies-your friends till they wished a strong wind would spring up and blow you away into the river and you were drowned? Or have you been brave and tried to make the best of a bad job, working frightfully hard, remembering there are lots of other pleasant things in the world besides sweetness (which turned to bitterness) in the flower upon which you had set your heart. Perhaps you, too, have had a parent butterfly who looked to you for all its	happiness . 	The clock at the Marist Convent chimedseven-fifteen. Elfie rose gently and the butterfly fluttered outinto the warm evening air"I've always got Father," she said.IV	She was bright during dinner. The Major always said their dinner hour was one of the pleasantest during the day. It was then they told each other ridiculous stories, and played at "make believe" and talked of Rose Marie and Peter Bumblebee and Billy Binns, the heron, and Mr. Dobbs, andAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	100Mr. Winks, and composed fresh, beautiful, and moving poems.	The Major, armed with a stumpy pencil and the back of an envelope, would start taking down the lines between meat and pudding (they had been thought out, first by one and then the other, during meat). At the cheese stage they would be half through. Dessert, which consisted of one sort of fruit only and salted almonds, at the making of which Elfie was a dab hand, saw the poem completed. Over their coffee they polished it up.	Tonight the Major said something must be done for Mr. Dobbs. He had seen him as he passed along Brewers Lane, and lie was in a despondent mood. Trade was not so brisk as it had been. There were the dog-days to contend with, he knew, but-Mr. Chrisp on Hill Rise was "doing things". 'Things to attract customers," said Mr. Dobbs in dismal tones.	"When I inquired what sort of things," said the Major, "he replied, 'Flowers as well as ferns. Bunches of Marguerite daisies. 'Arebells lying amongst the herrings careless-like, with bits of ice. Poppies amongst the turbot. Might be a bloomin' cornfield instead of a fish shop.'RIfle laughed.	"So we must do something," said the Major. "There must be more poems. He admitted poetry had been off for some months. He thought his customers had tired of the 01(1 poems, and he'd not had the head or the energy for new." The Major fished out the old stumpy pencil and an envelope from his waistcoat pocket, and they both thought hard while eating lamb cutlet and peas.	Ellie had finished first (her poem, not her cutlet), and offered it for her father's consideration"Do you want a lemon-sole,Very fresh and niceCondescend to look at me, I'm up against the ice."	The Major approved. So did Bridget, who had conic to remove the plates.	"They're that clever, the darlints, at portry," she said, as she descended the basement stairs to fetch a lemon sponge and some fancy fingers, "it's a privilege to be in the same house with them, though they are a bit queer in their heads about some things and their talk of that there Peter Bumblebee makes me quite scared when it's dark and the tenipist's 'owling.''The Major, with an apology, read his during dessert."It's a howler. Rifle, but may attract110		AN UNDRESSED HEROINE"I'm a jolly fresh young salmon, Beloved by cats and mammon. Tastier much than eggs on Ham, or bread with jam on."'Oh, Father I" protested Bide.	"I know,'' he agreed, nodding his head, ''But what is there to rhyme with salmon ? and there's a glut of it just now, Mr. Dobbs says.""There's gammon.""Won't work in. I've tried it."'Flow would it be:'Tastier still than eggs on ham straight from the gammon ?'"I think it's worse,' said the Major firmly.	Bridget, at the sideboard, spluttered, but turned the explosion deftly into a sneeze.	"Well, we could ask Mr. Dobbs which he prefers," said Elfie, "I'll write both out, but we'll go upstairs first."	On the balcony, over their coffee, they turned their attention to turbot, but found in conjunction with sherbet and Herbert it was not pleasing-especially with Herbert.	"It can't be done," said Elfie at last; "to introduce a Herbert into a poem about turbot is to turn the sublime into the ridiculous. Let's leave Mr. Dobbs and fish for the moment, and do another about something else." She liked being engaged thus, keeping her brain occupied, thinking out ridiculous doggerel, with no time for anything else. It kept her from dwelling on Brian. She slipped a hand into her father's. "Go on, dear, you begin. I feel like poetry tonight."	He asked her what it was to be about: the river, moons, sunsets, flowers, bats, apple-pies, Home Secretaries, Canadian canoes, Cheshire cheese. There was such a wide range of subjects. She could take her choice.She thought with her head against his shoulder."Finish 'The Bluebell Glade at Kew'," she said at length."But, my dear, it's long past bluebell time," he objected.They usually made their poems strictly topical.	"Never mind, I liked it. Shall I be in the way while you write ?''	He told her no, and scribbled for a while against the cover of a book. Then he read it aloud to her"Do you know a lovely glade, Flecked with light and flecked with shade? By both God and man 'twas madeThe bluebell glade at Kew.AN UNDRESSED	IIICROINE	IIIBlue as blue as summer's sky,Blue as blue as wild 'birds eye',Sweet as sweet as cherry-pie,Is the bluebell glade at New.""The little wild-flower veronica, commonly known asbird's eye, is the bluest thing in Nature," he paused to explain."I know," she said "it's heavenly.""Blue as far as eye can see, Bluebells dancing merrily. Just an azure symphony.Is the bluebell glade at New.Bluebells blue amid the trees, Bluebells calling to the bees, Bluebells sweet'ning every breezeIn the bluebell glade at New.Bluebells thick on every side, In their cups we insects hide, Not far oft are daisies pied,In that bluebell glade at New.Just across the moss-grown walk Daffodils they sing and talk, Swaying on each slender stalk,In the bluebell glade at New.Towards the bluebells they do bend, Each has got his special friend, And little whisp'ring secrets sendTo the bluebells down at New.Soon the bluebells will have flown, With petals blue the ground be strown. Let us hence before they're goneTo the bluebell glade at New.'	There was silence after he had finished, quite a lengthy silence. He waited for her criticism, praise, or blame, but the silence continued. Suddenly a tear, a hot big tear, splashed on to the hand that held hers, and he started. Raising her face to his he scrutinized it in the dim light."You're crying, RIfle," he said."No, darling."	"But you are.'' I-us voice was full of distress. She said nothing."Why are you crying ?"I-i-- Your poem is so sweet.""That is not enough to make you weep."But it was. The lines had recalled a perfect April afternoon112	AN	UNDRESSED HEROINEshe had once spent with Brian in the Bluebell Glade at Kew. An afternoon when her happiness had been so intoxicating she had had much ado to keep her feet from dancing with the bluebells and now all that seemed so tong agoAgain there was silence"Elfie, I'm waiting"What for ?"'For you to tell me your trouble.'I haven't got one. You're fanciful, Father."	He looked down at her hopefully. Perhaps he was imagining things. Perhaps it was but a momentary emotion. The day had been hot, maybe she was tired, and a tear, in a woman, one tear meant nothing at all. He raised her face, her eyes still brimmed with tears, and now they overflowed and fell down her cheeks, and he could feel her catch at a little sob.The Major swore beneath his breath.	He took out his handkerchief and dabbed gently at the tears.His Elfie weeping When had he seen her weepIf Elfie were unhappy, something serious must be amiss.If Elfie were unhappy, well-then, so was lie.	He held her to him closely, strainingly, as though to shield her from all the sorrow of the world.	"Can't you tell me, my chicken ?" He brushed the soft damp rings of her hair from her forehead with tender fingers. "Or would you rather not ? If you are unhappy, we both are. And I think I ought to know why I am unhappy. It wouldn't be fair to me if I didn't." His tone was whimsical, but she knew he spoke the truth her unhappiness would be his, and intensified, for that is the foolish way of parents, they take their children's sorrows to heart so much. And, determinedly, she decided he must not know. He must be kept happy-he, who had been unhappy for so many years.	She sat up and she lied. She lied bravely and splendidly. Elfie was big enough to risk the salvation of her soul for the people she loved.	"It is nothing, Father, wow." She smiled, and her tears dried up as raindrops on flower petals vanish in the sunshine. "What an old imaginative thing it is! Look at its forehead! Clapham junction isn't in it!" With soft fingers she smoothed away the criss-cross of lines on his brow. "Father, you are selfish to me.""Selfish'You never will let me enjoy myself as other girls do"Enjoy I" The Major was bewildered."Yes, cry. We like crying sometimes, you know. it's areal pleasure to us-we are built that way, especially whenAN UNI)l<J:ssl:J) IILROINE	113we're a weeny bit tired and-and-we have had misunderstandings with people we care for"	"Au !'' A great sigh of relief escaped the Major. It was that, a quarrel with Brian-he'd wondered. He was out with it at once his supposition Anxiety vanished from his face, twenty years fell away from him."Yes," she agreed, "there was a misunderstanding.'	"But that, that's nothing, Elfie. All by-young people quarrel when they care for one another. It's part of the game. I did it myself when I was quite young, because of the making-up after-that's where the fun comes in. Don't worry, my pigeon. Take it from me he's unhappier than you. I know Brian." He lay back in his chair.	"He'll be round first thing in the morning, if not tonight," lie patted Elfie-contented, happy little pats.	He drew a pipe from his pocket and was busy with it for a moment or two "My dear," he then said, drawing her head back to his shoulder, "you gave me quite a fright. I should have thought you would have been more sensible, that you knew Brian.''"You think," she asked slowly, "that-he cares for me	'Worships the ground you walk on !" The Major ejected large clouds of smoke.	"But I mean as a-lover.' Never before had father and daughter touched upon this.""That's just-what I do mean.""Oh," said she, and a little fluttering breath escaped her.So they both had made the same mistake.V	The last streak of red faded from the sky, the soft, luminous darkness of a summer night fell The bridge became an indeterminate span decked with points of light from the lamps. The gay laugh of a girl came up from the river. A white moth, with a whirr of wings, brushed past them, and fluttered through the widely opened window into the drawingroom, where Bridget had placed a lamp. A reed bird on the island sent up a sudden twittering note. Then the moon rose, and on the surface of the water was a band of dancing light, and the poplars, with their reaching fingers to the sky, showing up clear as in the light of day. Everything was transfigured in the soft white radiance.	The Major leaned towards her. "Feeling better, my Thicken"Yes, Father.""Happy ?"114	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	Then- was a fraction of a second's hesitation, so slight, so infinitesimal that even love's quickened senses failed to note it.'Quite, quite happy, Father dear."He bent and kissed her.CHAPTER IIIMAJOR cIIARRINGTON REPAYS HIS DEBT TOCOLONEL WYeKHAMSHE was glad afterwards, thanked God each morning and night for many years that He-for if not a far-seeing God, who was it ?-had led and helped her to tell that untruth and so make the last hours of her father's life happy.For that night Major Charrington died.	He was drowned in the river he had loved so well, in saving the life of Colonel Wyekham. He repaid his debt in full, and the world was a little lonelier and a little sadder for the loss of a very gallant gentleman.	Colonel Wyckhani, as was sometimes his habit, had strolled down to the Charriogtons for a chat, and the Major had suggested they should go out on the river for an hour in the moonlight-the three of them.	It would be pleasant after the heat, he said. He would paddle them gently up stream in a punt. It was not late. They might get as far as Eel Pie and then drift down stream with the current. The Colonel, too, might practise his punting (the Major had been teaching the old Colonel to punt) along by the Petersham meadows where the water was slack. And	there'd he few people about . 	It would be a grandopportunity. Not that lie meant to imply the Colonel couldn'tpunt ; but still a river free from small craft badly steered,slack water, and no wind were all helpful factors towardsfirst-class and easy punting.	In the end the two men went alone. Elfie pleaded fatigue, and it was not an excuse. She was weary after the emotion through which she had passed, her nerves exhausted by the strain of the evening. She was done. She wanted to take her lassitude to her quiet room) and take off her clothes and stretch her body between cool sheets and fall asleep.-a sleep profound, prolonged, bringing with it forgetfulness, oblivion.	She leant over the balcony as they went away, pushing to one side the riotous growth of the wistaria which clung aboutAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	115the topmost rail, and called a last good-bye to her father-a pale, slender figure in the moonlight amid the greenery.	"Good-bye, my white pigeon." He stood with his hand on the little gate and looked up at her. "You're quite sure you're all right and won't be lonely ?"	"Quite," she said. "I'm going to bed. Don't either of you fall in. And should you come across Rose Marie or Peter dancing in the moonlight or piping in the reeds, give them my love and this"-she blew a kiss across the little garden-"and there's another for you, Father dear Good night."He waved a hand, and threw her a kiss in return.The gate clanged to with its little groaning sound.II	She lay with one hand beneath her cheek and the other flung above her head as though she had sought relief from the warmth of the night. The frills of the loose sleeves and the neck of her nightgown fell away from her slim arms and throat. Her hair lay across the pillow and around her face, a soft dark beautiful mass. Her sleep was profound, and but for a slight expression of sadness about the curved mouth, she might have been a child as she lay there in the soft, tender moonlight.	Mrs. Ingleby, with a shaded candle, stood by the bed. She was trying to find courage to awake Elfie.	Twice she leant over her, breathing her name, but Elfle did not stir.	Mrs. Ingleby fought desperately with a great sob which came surging up to her throat, fought and stifled it.	She moved away from the bed, and put down the candle while she struggled with herself. Never had she knocked up against anything so difficult to do, never in the whole course of her life.	"And why should I ?" she thought. "Why should I do it tonight ? What purpose will be served in waking her up and giving these needless hours of agony ? It will keep, my news. And there is nothing she can do."	She glanced about the room before leaving it. The two windows were flung wide, admitting with the moonlight the purl of the river and an occasional sound of sleepy disturbed water-birds. She observed on a small table at the side of the bed two photographs-one so placed that Elfie's eyes would rest upon it as she awoke, the other with its face to the wall. There was nothing else on the table, and their curious juxtaposition attracted her attention. On an impulsenfl	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEMrs. Inglehy returned with silent footsteps to the bed and bent over the photographs. The one with its face to Elfie was Major Charrington, the other was her own son Brian, and on the glass protecting it lay a small drop of water, partially dry but distinctly visible by reason of the blur it caused on the shining surface.	Mrs. Ingleby stood debating what it meant the position of the photograph and the blurred effect on the glass. She had always taken it for granted, as had Major Charrington, that some day Elfie and her son would marry. She was deeply attached to the girl, and it would have been almost inconceivable to her that Brian should not want to marry her. Yet-the photo with its face to the wall I	I wonder 	she mused.	Stooping down and holding the candle for an instant close to the pillow, she saw that which the moonlight had failed to reveal Elfie had been weeping. A tear still undried lay on her cheek. The girl stirred. Mrs. Ingleby held her breath, but Elfie did not wake.Extinguishing the candle, Mrs. Ingleby stole softly fromthe room and closed the door.III	Brian awaited her in the hall, and as she descended the stairs he advanced eagerly to meet her. His face was white and twitching and he appeared terribly unnerved."Well 1' he asked.	"1 have not told her," replied his mother. "She was in a deep sleep I thought it cruel to arouse her. Nothing can be done till the morning, and she would have lain agonizing through the long night.''	''lint supposing she awakened and discovered-'' Brian could not finish. He had helped to carry the Major in nuand lay him on the old sofa in the small room behind the diningroom, the man lie had loved so much. It had all been donc o swiftly and silently. No one had been aroused. The latchkey of the house had been discovered in the Major's pocket. Bridget. who slept in the basement, slept the sleep of a hard workvr.	''Supposing.'' said Brian, gaining control of himself, ''she went down to look for him.''	"She won't, and if she (lid I should hear her. I have decided to rcmain here tonight on the drawing-room couch.'' Mrs. logleby opened the front door and suggested they should walk a little by the river.'1 - alit to talk to you, my son, and we have the latchkey."AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	117	She took his arm and in the moonlight they walked along the towing-path down to Isleworth Ferry. The river where it was touched by the light of the moon, now high in the deep velvety blue of the sky, might have been millions of restless dewdrops. The branches of the chestnuts in Cholmondeley Walk threw great black shadows-giant arms extended-across their path. On the meadows and the Old Deer Park lay the silent hush of night, and in the air was the cool freshness of night.	They walked without speech for a time, while Nature laid a healing touch upon their hearts.	Presently Mrs. Ingleby asked how it had happened-the accident. Mr. Winks had been so incoherent.Brian paused to light a pipe.	"As far as I can gather the pole snapped. The old Colonel was shoving the punt, and in trying to recover himself, fell in. He can't swim, you know.""And then ?"	'f suppose the Major went to the rescue-though not far from the bank, they were in deep water. He must have succeeded in holding up the Colonel till they reached theKunt, which had drifted down strcarn some little distance orn where the pole was found jammed in the mud. Apparently the Colonel got a grip on the side of the punt, though he was too done up to climb in, and the Major sank-exhaustion or heart failure, I suppose-a heavy man and no longer young, sixty I should think.""Quite," said Mrs. Ingleby.	"Then old Winks saw something unusual in appearance drifting down stream, it was the Colonel, hanging to the punt and giving faint cries for help. Winks jumped into a skiff-fortunately he was taking his evening stroll near Bessum's-and put across. The Colonel was nearly finished. He said something about saving Major Charrington and then lost consciousness. The poor old Major's body was recovered near Glover's Island."	'But I can't think how it came about that nobody saw the accident with such a moon."	"It was late, you know, nearly eleven. They must have been up stream some distance. What beats me is Elfie not being there-so fond of the river, and especially at night. Poor old Elfie." Brian stopped to knock his pipe clear of ash against his boot."Let us sit down for a little while," suggested Mrs. Ingleby.	They were opposite to Isleworth Ferry, and the curiousshaped, tall building which seems to dominate the small cluster of factories and sheds grouped at the edge of the river. Isleworth, not particularly pretty by day, assumes a116	AN UNi)NESSL1) HEROINEquaint and foreign-looking appearance in the moonlight. It reminded Brian tonight of some little Italian town set about with vineyards (the pollarded willows and osier bed).You were out with Elfie this afternoon in the car ?"Brian assented.'Did she scent all right then, her usual self'Yes. Why ?"	'Just now," said Mrs. Ingleby, "I noticed that she'd been crying before she fell asleep there were traces of tears on her cheek."	"Elfie crying l" Brian was amazed. "But I thought she never cried. I've only seen her once in my life, and that was from temper." He whistled softly, hands in his pockets, wondering, cogitating, troubled at the thought of those tears."What did you talk about this afternoon ?"	Brian turned round and looked at his mother. "Nothing special. Why do you ask ?"	"Was there anything you said that could have had a depressing influence upon her ?""Not a blessed thing."	"And you can recollect nothing that might have upset her ?" persisted Mrs. Ingleby.	"No, I tell you, Mother. She got a bit waxy because 1 made the very obvious statement that Humphry was in love with her.""You told her that ?"	"Yes, why not ? There was no harm. 1 thought girls liked to be told men were keen on 'em. I know most do. She seemed huffy for a bit. Then she got all right and we had a jolly run in the car. I recollect what we talked about then-I could tell you every word. Elfie's always sort of hinted I ought to do something, same as you have, Mother, not be a slacker, and I was telling her about my exploration scheme. Got quite carried away with it, the more I think of it, the more I like it-getting dead nuts on it. Grand idea, I think. Don't know what I'm going to explore, but that's a detail. I felt I'd like to start off this afternoon, and her with me-''"Did you tell her that i""I did.""As your wife ?" asked Mrs. Inglehy, a little breathlessly.	Brian stared at his mother. "Good lord, no I don't feel that way about Elfie, fond as I am of her. Did you think I did ? She stopped to consider my proposition, surprised, slightly amused. No, as my sister, cousin, aunt, anything she liked so long as she'd come. She'd be fine at that sort of thing-a born traveller, I bet. I said we should have to have chaperons for decency's sake . . . . Make up a party."AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	119'You said this to her ?""Idid. Whynot?"	"No reason why not," said Mrs. Ingleby. She got up. She had cleared up the reason for the tears. Elfie, she knew, loved her son, or she (Mrs. Ingleby) believed she did. It was apparent her son did not love Rifle."Let us go back," she said.Iv	It	was over-the funeral. The blinds had been raised atNo. 1, Wistaria Terrace, and the sunshine streamed oncemore into the front rooms. (How the sunshine hurt Rifle !)She had stood the ordeal well, marvelously, her friends said.Frightfully, piercingly she felt her trouble, but not over-whelmingly. She refused to be overwhelmed. To her it seemedit would have been disloyal to her father, that it would havehurt him, grieved him, to see her overwhelmed. She felt thathe was still about her (he and she had played at "make-believe"so long, it helped her now), that he was telling her to be pluckyfor his sake, to hold up her head . . . Refuse to be crushed.		The world must not see her crushed.	For years, above the mantelpiece of his small back bedroom, these words, written on a card, had hung:Had it pieas'd heaven To try me with affliction; Steeped me in poverty to the very lips, I should have found in some part of my soul A drop of patience.	He had always said they were such grand lines, so full of courage, and that when he had been down in the depths, feeling he could fight no more with his own weak self, he had gone upstairs and read and re-read them. He knew them off by heart, but he had liked to see the written words: "I should have found in some part of my soul a drop of patience."	So she was trying to find in some part of her soul "a drop of patience". For patience here meant courage to face things.	Acquaintances misunderstood the front she turned to them and the world. Miss Doyle was positively overcome at her not weeping at the grave-side for "her poor dear father, who'd thought so much of her." And as for her not wearing a mourning veil, a thick mourning veil thoroughly enshrouding her features, Miss Doyle felt it to be almost wanting in respect to the deceased. Had not she, herself, purchased one for the funeral at Duckling's ?-giving two-and-elevenpence for it-a120	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEconsiderable amount for an article to be used only once, unless it were still in the fashion when her brother came to die. And as for Elfie's hat She called it indecent-no other word. A plain, black straw which just anyone might have worn at any time-black being always more or less fashionable-and without a scrap of crape. She said this to Flumphry, and he made her quite jump at the shocking expression he used. He always had "gone on" in a silly way about Elfie, believing whatever she did was perfect. Miss Doyle had no patience.	But Hulnphry, the Inglebys, Bridget, and Mr. Dobbs made no mistake about Elfie. They knew and understood her. It was Mrs. Ingleby who had been at her side through the first dread hours of knowledge, and when she had left her she had felt by years an older woman. It was Bridget who, later in the day, had found her lying by her father's side on the white bed, whispering little words of love to him, crooning over him, chafing the cold hands, kissing the still white face, calling upon him to come back to his little chicken, that his white pigeon could not live without him. It was Bridget, again, who had carried her in an exhausted, semi-conscious condition back to her bed, and Brian who had hung about the passage outside her door, waiting to see if there was the smallest thing he could do for her; and Humphry, on the front-door step, imagining he could hear her stifled sobs, cot to the heart, wincing at the sounds, which in reality were not made by Elfie-for no tears came to her relief in those first terrible days-and craving to be allowed to perform some service for her-it didn't matter what it was. (Humphry was in a mood for sacrifice.)	These friends of hers understood. Brian even felt he wished he didn't. It actually hurt him to witness such black misery. It seemed wrong, horrible that any human being should suffer such mental stress. It would be better if people did not love their belongings-their parents, children, husbands, wives, sisters, brothers so infernally ; then when they lost them they would worry through more easily. Yes, Brian was really moved and distressed for Elfie. He vowed he would do all sorts of kind and nice things for her when they got her to Cholmondeley Court (he and Mrs. Ingleby had settled straight away that she must go to them when the funeral was over; she could not be alone, and she had no relations), and he longed to get her there to begin doing them.	Mr. Dobbs perhaps understood best of all. He was an understanding man-those slow, large men are. He had seen them-the father and daughter-much together. The hundreds of times he had watched them pass down Brewers Lane, or across the Green hand-in-hand, or arm-in-arm, asAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	121Elfie added inches to her stature, deep in talk, engrossing talk. Sometimes be had wondered what it could be all about. He and Mrs. Dobbs did not talk as much in a month as those two did in an hour. It beat him, he said. There were so few subjects for discussion, and nothing really exciting, unless there happened to be a good murder trial on hand, like the Crippen case. But Elfie and her father had always seemed to find something exciting, and amusing too, from the way they had laughed.	Mr. Dobbs, with a heavy heart, carried his own floral contribution to the house on the morning of the funeral, and Elfie, who heard his voice inquiring from Bridget how she was, had darted down the stairs and through the front door and along the flagged path to the gate to thank him personally, and she did this right before everybody, all the peeping inhabitants of the three other houses saw her in the strong sunshine of the summer day; and thereby so scandalizing Miss Doyle, whose eyes had been glued the greater part of the morning to a peephole created by a slight turning of one of the laths of the Venetian blind in their dining-room (her interest in who sent or did not send wreaths being strong), that she declared for two pins she would draw up every blind in her own house to mark her strong disapproval of Elfie's most unconventional action.	"Mourning people, the near relatives of a deceased person, should not be seen outside a house till after the funeral"she spoke aloud-it was a relief to her outraged feelings. "And now-why, she's actually taking Mr. Dohhe's hand. Good gracious, a common fishmonger What next! And -I believe she's pressing it. If she's not pressing it, why is she holding it so long ? It's-disgraceful	"What's disgraceful 1' inquired Humphry. He had come to the dining-room in search of a whisky-and-soda. Usually the most abstemious of men; hanging about the house with nothing to do but wait to attend a funeral was getting on his nerves.	Miss Doyle started ; she started with such a lack of selfcontrol that she banged herself against a writing-table. Humphry had a most disagreeable way of pouncing upon people, she thought; he always had pounced.	"Why," she said, "Elfie being out there on the Terrace right before everybody, and wreaths arriving-"	"Elfie out there!" With small ceremony Humphry pushed Miss l)oyle to one side and eagerly looked through the blind. Yes, she was there, leaning against the stone balustrade, the sun shining down on to her uncovered head ; and what a slim, frail thing she looked in her black frock, beside the gigantic Mr. Dobbs. and what tragedy lay in her small, white face122	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEl-lumphry could scarcely recollect ever having seen Rifle when she had not been gay, buoyant, happy and now, this drooping, listless figure.	'When your father died, your aunt and I were measured for our mourning in our rooms, and never put a step outside the door till we entered the first coach-''	"Hush!" cried Humphry, so loudly and peremptorily, that Miss Doyle from sheer astonishment did.	He wanted to watch Rifle lie felt no sensation of spying with his whole heart and soul and eyes he wanted to gaze at her as she walked slowly back to the house. Her head was up now, her figure was erect. She was thinking of what Mr. Dohbs had said "The greatest gentleman I ever knew, I Miss RIfle never said or thought or did an unkind thing in his life, or my name isn't William Dobbs.." She must try to be worthy of her father, to be brave, not to give way.But, if only he were here to help her. If only- Suddenly a wild, desolating sense of "being alone" swept over RIfle like a huge wave engulfing her. She was alone. She would go on being alone. Soon he, her father, would be leaving the beloved little house, he would be carried along the sun-bathed Terrace, leaving behind him the river and all that he had loved so well, and-her. She would be alone. Clutching at a branch of wistaria, she leant against the lintel of the door, while she wrestled with herself for control before entering the darkened house, and Humphry, who was still watching, turned away from the window, his own eyes wet with tears,CHAPTER IVELFIE DECIDES TO LOOK FOR A SITUATION"So, roughly, 1 have about fifteen pounds a year to live on, and the furniture ?"	Mrs. Ingleby and RIfle were seated on the lawn beneath the cedar tree at Cholmondeley Court.	The weather still held. It was now September, and the afternoon was sunny, slightly hazy the delicious soft haze that comes with early autumn, and through which the brilliant autumn flowers: dahlias, hollyhocks, phlox, Aaron's rod, anemone, japonica, shone with a mild radiance.RIfle put the question in a curiously detached voice.Whether she possessed fifteen or fifteen thousand pounds a¥AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	123year seemed from her attitude a matter of supreme indifference to her. And it was.	"Yes," replied Mrs. Ingleby. "Your father's pension died with him, but the State allows you, as his daughter, this small amount."	"And very nice of it, 1 think. Why should it keep me? And it will be enough for my clothes, that is something. I don't suppose I shall earn a princely sum at first." Elfie turned her attention to the heel of a sock she was knitting. She was looking desperately tired, but her needles clicked rapidly-turning heels even stopped her from thinking.	''Are you still on that ?" asked Mrs. Inglehy, with a little sigh."What ?'	"This idea of work. Won't you stop being proud, and come and make your home with us, my dear ? We all want you-Mr. Ingleby, Brian, and I. I have no daughter, Elfie, and-pride is not a very admirable trait, in fact, I think it's a rather horrid one."	Elfie smiled. "It isn't altogether pride. It's because I want something to do.""But what can you do ?""That's just the puzzle What do you think?""Nothing," said Mrs. Ingleby."Yes, I could, if I tried-heaps of things.""Name them.""I could be a waitress at a tea-shop."	Mrs. Ingleby.laughed ironically. "I'd give you one hour there, then you'd be discharged."	"Why, may I ask ?" Elfie put down her knitting She was becoming interested. Mrs. Ingleby's kind heart glowed with satisfaction and pleasure. Only that morning she had said to her husband that the girl's apathy, indifference to everything around her, though she knew she made enormous efforts to hide it, were unnatural, almost alarming, in one so young. "If she'd weep, or talk about her heart-break, vowing, like all young things, that she'd never, never get over her loss, one would know there was hope for her. But this-why, it hurts me all over just to look at her!"	And now Elfie was really exhibiting an interest in something	Mrs. Ingleby felt exactly as a nurse feels when the crisis has arrived in the condition of a patient-anxious for fear of a relapse. She meant there to be no relapse in Elne's case if she could help it."You'd break things."	"Break things!" Elfie looked surprised. "I didn't know I was destructive."124	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"It's your wrists, your arms. Look at them. I doubt if you could carry a pot of tea, roll and butter, and plate for one person, let alone a heavy tray crammed with heavy crockery, and teas for half a dozen impatient, ringing, peremptory people hungry for cold Cambridge sausageschiefly crumbs-fish rissoles-mostly pot ato-fourpenny plates of York ham that isn't York, and Welsh rarebit minus the rarebit."Elfie smiled again; it was a languid smile, still it was one."How do you know about these places ?"	'When I was young I was poor and constantly lunched at London tea-shops. I cannot see you in one in any capacity but that of a customer. And talking of tea, I wonder how much longer it will be before ours arrives. I'm aching for mine. Servants, if you've noticed, would rather die than bring tea five minutes before the time ; but five minutes after they apparently regard as a fixed law of nature. Even Stroud falls into this error."	The afternoon was warm with the heavy, still, languorous warmth of September. Mrs. Ingleby was quite tired through talking so much, but she felt she must keep on. Now that Elfie's attention was arrested, it must not be permitted to relax. She wished that Brian would come out and help her. She wondered where lie was.	Elfie herself continued the conversation "If tea-shops are oft, what about nursing ?''	"Worse. You need the strength of an elephant, and the skin of a crocodile.""Or selling programmes at theatres ?""Pish"Or housekeeping for somebody ?"	'That's the best suggestion of the lot. You're good at a house, a first-rate little manager and shopper, but you're too young.''"Oh no, Mrs. Ingleby. Too old, perhaps, but not tooyoung." Elfie spoke with extreme earnestness, and Mrs.Ingleby saw' she meant what she said. "Years don't count in life-mere years. My father"-her lips quivered-' 'never grew up. He was very, very young, so young that I often wondered how he came to be my father at all, it seemed to me an accident."	"Then that settles it," said Mrs. Ingleby, interrupting didactically. She must sheer away from the poor dear Major. In time to come she would be willing, happy to talk of him to his daughter. She did not believe in "burying" people for good. When she died she would like to feel that her dear ones talked of her sometimes-recalled her sayings, her doings; smiled over them, more than wept over them. Then.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	125in her other and, she hoped, better life, it would give her satisfaction to know she was still part and parcel of the ones on earth, and still counted with those who were left behind. But not now would she talk to Elfie of her father-the wound was too raw."So that settles it. It you're too old for a housekeeper-I know what you mean, and perhaps you're right-you'retoo old for any position. Young, pretty women are much more in demand than elderly ones. Old women are only wanted at station waiting-rooms, where smoky fires, stuffy smells and dirt don't matter, and where the dear old creatures can take perpetual meals inside a newspaper with their crochetwork, and strong cups of tea. So now nothing remains for you but to put up with us-unless of course you fancy waitingrooms, prefer waiting-rooms to Cholmondeley Court and us."	"It isn't that," said Elfie. "You know it isn't. Occupation is good for one and-there is my pride."	"Pride, fiddlesticks ! And please don't begin all over again till after tea, for I've no arguments left. Ah, and here is tea." She hailed Stroud, the stately old butler, with joy. His slow, dignified legs moving across the lawn, his firm, superior, and condescending arms with their burden of glittering silver and costly china, his face entirely devoid of expression, as a superior servant's should be in a "good house", a turnipy face, a face white, smooth, round, blank, but crowned with smooth hair instead of an upstanding tuft of leaves, his well-blacked compact feet and strong unsoiled hands, all brought to Mrs. Ingleby a sense of security, of reliability, of a foundation of strength, a foundation as strong and everlasting as the Tudor one upon which the walls of Cholmondeley Court were built. And she needed strength, a backing. This warfare of words with RIfle was the third she'd been engaged in during the last week, and at each she'd apparently lost ground. At first Elfie had only touched upon the question of leaving them tentatively. Work had been spoken of as "something for the future". Now she'd got as far as formulating the sort of work she thought she could undertake. At the next-well, would there be a next ? Mrs. Ingleby already saw her with her trunk packed, departing somewhere "to be worked to death".	And she wanted her to stay. She had meant it when she said "I want you to be my daughter." She wanted her to stay, and, in time, to marry Brian. She was beginning to think she might have made a mistake about Brian's feelings for RIfle. He'd been so kind, so wonderfully attentive and affectionate towards the girl since she came to them, anticipating her every wish, waiting on her hand and foot. Never had she seen him so nice with anyone.AN	IN nRILSSEII 	hEROINE	SIR asked Strond kr 111111 iiow, had the master and Mr. Brian been told tea was ready	They had. Mr. Brian was coming. The master was out golfing."Golfing	Why he had a round this morning"Yes, madam," replied Strood.''Did he go directly after lunch	"No, madam." Strood coughed behind his hand Mrs. Ingleby scented interesting information in the possession of Stroud, as to his master's movements."Do you happen to know what he was doing 1'	"Yes, madam. He was practising with a captive golf ball in the library.''"Good gracious I Did he do any damage ?"	"Not much, madam. It was chiefly approach shots to the 'earthrug. Beyond removing a little of the surface of the Turkey, the library is much as it was, madam."Mrs. Ingleby's lips twitched. "Thank you, Stroud."	Elfie laughed outright when Stroud was out of earshot, and Mrs. Ingleby felt deeply grateful both to her husband and butler for evoking that laugh. What mattered the removal of chunks of wool from the Turkey carpet if Elfie laughed, and now that she had started, if she would continue.	She turned quite an uplifted face to her son as he strolled across the lawn, a fine, cool figure of a man in his well-cut suit of grey flannel; and she suggested Elfie should pour out the tea. Anything to keep her busy and occupied, and from relapsing again into apathy.	"But why ?" asked Brian, as he dropped into a hammock chair beside Elfie. "I want quite six cups, it's a thirsty day, and Elfie looks tired."	'Elfie doesn't look a bit tired," snapped Mrs. Ingleby. How stupid and tactless Brian was! What girl, what woman ever appreciates being told she looks tired, which is tantamount to being informed that she lacks attractiveness at the moment. "And I've asked her to pour out because I am. I met Miss Doyle after lunch. I'd been to see a sick baby in Water Lane whose mother had been feeding it on stewed eels caught up at Teddington, and Miss Doyle kept me standing in the heat for a full ten minutes while she regaled me with tales of the misdemeanours of poor Humphry. If Mr. Winks had not been lurking at hand I should have thrown her into the river. Elfie, darling, another lump of sugar, please; and you're eating all the cress sandwiches, Brian, and forgetting me. Where are your manners	Brian smiled indulgently at his mother's tartness. He knew her in these moods, usually they indicated she was put out on somebody else's account, never on her own. She wasAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	127too fine and sweet by nature ever to dwell on her own injuries.That his 'Rifle looked tired" should have been the cause of this edge to her tongue would have astonished him beyond words.	"What has Humphry been doing ?" he asked in conciliatory accents.	"It's not what he's been doing, but what he's not being doing. He's churlish.""He always was," said Brian.	'He's worse. He doesn't speak at meals, and he said rode things about the pickled cabbage at supper last night.''	RIfle expressed sympathy for Humphry. She, who had occasionally been bidden with her father to supper at the Doyles' at Humphry's urgent request, had met Miss Doyle's pickled cabbage; it had been hard and sour and blue, and had been cut into broad ribbons instead of nice thin strips of a fine red colour. She could picture Humphry's face as he pushed the tough lumps irritably to the side of his plate. Humphry paid a hundred a year to the Doyles for his board and lodging, and he was fed disgracefully, she knew.	Mrs. Ingleby continued "Then, he's turned all the framed texts out of his bedroom. Miss Doyle found them in a heap on the landing."	"Has he ?" Rifle's interest was manifest. She leaned forward in her low chair, her eyes, which had kindled with amusement, on Mrs. Ingleby's face. She also knew the texts, they had been an artistic achievement of Miss Doyle when a girl-scrolls-pale blue and pink scrolls, with Madonna lilies carelessly growing out of nothing at all on either side of the scrolls. Chinese-white Madonna lilies and gold-leaf lettering in Roman characters on the scrolls. "The LORD will provide." Such an encouragement to the improvident, RIfle had always thought. "The LORD is my Shepherd; I shall not want." Further encouragement to the thriftless. "Watch and Pray", and so on. And now they were banished. What had caused Humphry's sudden outbreak of violence towards scrolls and texts	"Then, his valances disappeared one day from his bed. Miss Doyle, after a big hunt, discovered them rolled up in a ball on the top of his wardrobe. She nearly fell off the ladder from shock. He complained they were unhealthy, stuffy things, and hideously ugly-"	"And they were," agreed Rifle. "Pleated, plaid cretonne like a highland kilt."	Brian laughed. "Poor old Humphry. I wonder what's specially put him out just now. I expect he wants a holiday."	"Yes," said Mrs. Ingleby, "away from that uncle and aunt of his. The Doyles remind me of palliasses." She126	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEpaused to remove a fly from her tea Elfie and Brian awaited her explanation. Palliasses were a decade beyond their memories' reach.	'A palliasse is a mattress stuffed with straw. One used to meet it beneath feather beds. It was hard and without springs, full of lumps, and sudden empty spaces which were almost worse than the lumps if it were your evil fortune to lie upon the palliasse without a feather bed between. Then, it contained smells, musty, mildewy smells, and it was brown and dull, brown dull canvas, and very heavy and difficult to move. It was, in fact, a thing that brought tears to your eyes even to gaze upon. And-Mr. and Miss Doyle are exactly like it.'' Mrs. Ingleby majestically rose and pushed back her chair. Her fatigue appeared to have vanished. ''I must go,'' she said. ''I have a hundred things to do before dinner. The Curate's wife is ill again-shingles this time-which betokens a rundown condition, poor creature but careless of her."	She walked away to fetch her sunshade, gloves, and a bunch of muscat grapes for the Curate's wife. She called out from the portico that Brian had better take Elfie on the river, it would do her good. "Take no refusal," she commanded, "it's a lovely evening-I only wish I could go." She disappeared into the house with a smile hovering about the corners of her mouth. She had noted Brian's movement towards the girl as she called out her suggestion. Not exactly an eager but a quite willing movement And rivers and trees and, later on, a nice sunset and things like that were all helpful.II	When she returned to the lawn five minutes later-she proposed to leave the place by the river gate-she found Brian alone, immersed in a travel book. In reply to her inquiry he said Elfie had gone to see old Colonel \Vyckham."And she wouldn't go on the river ?"	'Well, I didn't asked her, as she said she must go. The old man isn't well. She didn't give me a chance"Why didn't you walk with her there ?"	"I didn't think of it. Mother, how seedy and tired Elfie looks"-he put down his book-"and in that black too. I can't bear her in black."	"I never met anyone who attached such importance to looks as you, Brian," said Mrs. Ingleby with asperity. She unfurled her sunshade and opened it with such a bang it nearly cracked the silk.''I- ?''AN UN DRE5SIiI) HEROINE	129	"Yes.	This is the second time this attcrrioon you've criticized Lilies appearance, and 1 think she looks sweet.''Brian stared at his mother in surprise	Remember Lilies been through a great deal, the shock was enough to kill her."	''Of course, I know, it was awful. I'd de anything to cheer her up."	"Well, then, don't keep on saying she looks tired, which is only another way of saying she looks a fright. You've no tact.'''I-" Brian was bereft of speech.	''Yes, you. I don't know how 'ou can eve!! think of how she looks, when the sweet soul of her shines through everything. Rifle is really a very lovely girl. Give her a few months, put her in some pretty clothes-''''That's just it,'' interrupted Brian.''PsIlaw '' (or sonit'tliilk like it) ejaculated Mrs. ingleby.You've no patience '' Placing her parasol above her head,after eveing the round hot sun in the west as though it werea cannon ball, she pranced across the grasii and closed the iron gate behind her with a bang.CHAPTER \THUMPHRY SPEAKS OUTELFIE spent much Of ]let time in the weeks that followed studying the advertisement columns of the morning papers at the Richmond Free Library or in visiting registry offices in London. She preferred the Richmond Free Library. The Richmond Free Library was unable to put her through her paces, ask her searchi i uustiolis, imbue her with the feeling that she was the most useless creature in the universe, while extracting from her heavy booking fees. In the Richmond Free Library she renewed her coui age and her self-respect. She ceased to feel an incubus, a parasite (from the doors of the ri gistry offices after each interview with interlocutory and oltcn impertinent women she had drawled worm-like).	Presently it began to dawn upon Icr that she must adopt other measures if she wished to secure a situation before she was forty. She must say she could ''do things'', even if she couldn't. That was the only way S/n' oust pile it on. C530	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEShe must say she had had wide experience in the management of a house (which was true; from the age of six she had practically run her parents'). She must pretend there was nothing she could not do, from building the house she was to supervise to razing it to the ground, if its bricks and material were required for another purpose.And she found it worked.	One morning she received a pleasant, polite letter from a Mrs. Fish, of "The Top o' the Hill", Loamgate, Surrey, asking her if she would meet her for an interview the following clay at the Criterion Restaurant (door of grill room) at one o'clock. That she, RIfle, from her letter sounded exactly what Mrs. Fish required, which tvas more of a companion to her eldest daughter, who was often alone owing to her, Mrs. Fish, being much occupied in many and various ways, than housekeeper to herself. That her age was no drawback, as somebody young was required, and would Rifle be punctual, as she, Mrs. Fish, had several other ladies to interview (there had been a hundred and fifty replies to her advertisement in the Morning Post), and she must catch the 1.35 back to Loamgate, having an important engagement to fulfil that afternoon. There were other points of information in the letter, but quite irrelevant to the situation.	Elfie's spirits were insensibly cheered. She was tired of searching for a post. Nothing is more disheartening to a man or woman than to be told day after day that he or she is not wanted, and the information not always couched in the politest terms. She liked the sound of Mrs. Fish, and she liked the name of the house, "Top o' the Hill". It seemed to her that a house with such a name must stand freshly, breezily detached from other houses and human beings, and shops and noises; and commanding a wide outlook of rolling downs, meadows, and woods. Not that, in a sense, it mattered to Elfie very much where she lived or with whom she lived, or what she did (the harder the work the better she would like it), for life to her was still black, still an existence to be got through somehow. Before her friends she was full of courage. She did not weep. She made an effort to be interested in all that was going on in the Inglchy household, and to a certain extent she was interested. She was too intelligent not to be. But there were days when the strain of trying to smile and be cheerful was very great, when she felt she must get away from these kind people, and be herself. With strangers she need not pretend. It was pretence that was killing her. Mrs. Ingleby, usually so perspicacious, was unaware of what the girl was going through-she would have wept had she known, and would have insisted upon her being allowed to work out her salvation in her own way. But she did realize dimly the stateAN UNDRESSED HEROINE 	131vJ Lilies mind when she followed her to the garden with Mrs. Fish's letter, and she heard the strong ring of hope in her voice, hope that she would be successful in obtaining the situation.	Mrs. Ingleby (lid not say, as was her first impulse, ''So you insist upon leaving us.'' What she did say was this''Mrs. Fish will engage you, i'm sure, if she's intelligentthough don't build upon it too much. Women have a tiresome, irresponsible way sometimes of suddenly changing their minds, and finding they 'cant a gardener instead of a governess, or a swarm of bees instead of a milking-goat."	Mrs. Ingleby was cutting some late-flowering roses. It was a mild October afternoon, with a hint of rain in the air. A sense of peace, of great quiet, pervaded the old place. Brown and yellow leaves fluttered gently to earth from the great chestnuts and plane trees by the river. In the kitchen garden, a place of delight with its old red walls, walls over which ancient fig trees, apricots and nectarines were symmetrically trained (and what fruit there had been that summer !), the sun shone with a mild warmth, drawing from the earth that faint and not unpleasant scent of decaying vegetation. Near to the fig trees, and some distance removed from the rosery proper, a lovely "Lion" rose and a "Rayon d'Or" were blooming luxuriantly as though in defiance of the passing of the year, and it was these Mrs. Ingleby was cutting, pausing every now and again to bury her face in their delicate sweetness.	"We shall miss you, of course, dreadfully, but I think perhaps you are wise to go." She passed an arm through Rifle's, and led her to a little grassy place intersected by flagged paths, and gay with old-fashioned flowers, from which a flight of irregular stone steps led up to the long slope of grass in front of the house and Mr. Ingleby's putting greens. "But you must promise us faithfully when you want to return to us you will." She drew' RIfle down beside her on to a stone bench, near to a sundial. "What we are going to do without you I don't know.""You are kind," said Rifle tremulously.	"It isn't kindness, it's selfishness at bottom. We all want you because you possess the priceless and rare gift of being more interested in other people than you are in yourself, and that makes for popularity. I heard you with Brian last night. For two hours he talked to you of his projected travels, or exploration, as he likes to call it ; he showed you maps, pictures; he read you bits from hooksScott, Nansen, and other explorers whose names I forget, even old Livingstone. He drew diagrams on paper, sketches of proposed routes, lists of stores, men, mules, ammunition, compasses, instruments, cameras, and I know not what;132	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEand never once did your interest flag, never once did you exhibit boredom.'But I wasn't bored,' said Rifle.	"Well, if you weren't you ought to have been Do you know what lie said when he went to bed ?''"No."	'With RIfle I believe I could explore the ends of the earth.'	Mrs. Ingleby's eyes were on her roses, and Elfie's on the sun-dial, and the girl made no movement."So you see we shall all miss you it you go to this Mrs.Fish, whom I'm trying not to dislike too violently"Thank you," said Rifle, but her voice was toneless.	Mrs. Ingleby got up. What was in Rifle's mind ? Her eyes were inscrutable. There had been a slight access of colour to her pale face on hearing of Brian's words; beyond that, nothing. No sign that she had found pleasure in them, or even cared.	"1 wonder if she has ceased to care for him,' thought Mrs. Ingieby. "He deserves it if she has-but it would be hard luck, for I believe he's just beginning to find out he cares for her. Slow', stupid fellow that he's been."They passed up the flight of steps to the lawn above.	''I," said Mrs. Ingieby, "am going to put these roses in water; Stroud makes flowers look as though they possessed backbones."	"And I," said Rifle, "to write to Mrs. Fish, and then to tell Colonel Vyckham 1 have at last something in view."	Again was Mrs. Ingleby struck by the ring of hope in the voice of the girl.II	Humphry, strolling along the towing-path an hour or two later, discried Elfie in the distance walking in the direction of Islew'orth Ferry. She had paid her visit to Colonel Wyck ham, had been bowed and scowled out of the house by an irritated Jarvis, who was of the opinion that his master's debilitated condition was purely through fatigue brought about by too many visitations from fussy and talkative females (Mrs. Ingleby and Rifle), and now, glad of a little time to herself before going in to dress for dinner, was making for the old seat beneath the chestnut where she and her father had so often sat weaving romances and watching for the chance coming of Billy Binns.	She walked with a quick, fleeting movement she had never lost, a movement reminiscent of creatures of the wood. Mrs.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	133Ingleby always clung to her simile in relation to Elfie of 'a teal blown by the wind, or a fawn among bracken''. Even now, fighting hard against depression, for October evenings in themselves are full of a melancholy sadness, she walked with a swift, wild grace, and Humphry, notwithstanding his long stride, had much ado to catch her up.	She started when he spoke to her. She had not encountered him, though she'd frequently seen him pass Cholmondeley Court-he walked most nights by the river-since the day of her father's funeral, and both were embarrassed.	Huinphry wanted to speak of all the things that lay at his heart, los sympathy for her, his pity : and she was devoutly praying he wouldn't.'May I walk with you ?' he asked awkwardly.'Why, of course, Humpliry,' she replied.Their conversation was disjointed at first. Each wasstriving for ease. Then Elfie plunged into the subject of her going away, just because she guessed how shy and awkward he was feeling, and the curses he was showering upon himself beneath his breath. She told him of her quest for work, and her prospective interview with Mrs. Fish on the following day	Hurnphry listened in silence. He was distressed, dismayed at her news. She was never again returning to the little house ? It was to be let furnished, or sub-let unfurnished if no desirable tenant were soon available, and Bridget, who was acting as caretaker, with her friend Mrs Povey for company, was to return to her borne in Ireland.	"But," said he, "I heard a rumour that you might make youi home with the Inglebys for the present."	He listened with brows drawn together to Elfie's explanation. She could not live on charity, however dear the people who offered it to her. She had no money, and she desired work above everything else in life. She enlarged upon her great need for a settled occupation, but Humphry was not listening. One sentence drummed in his ears: "I have no money." His heart had leapt at the words.	They had arrived at the old bench near to the Ferry. Without ceremony he asked her to sit down. She hesitated. There was something in his face and manner that aroused her fears. She said she must get back. She would be late for dinner. He looked at his watch.'It is half past six," said he, "and dinner is--"'At a quarter to eight."	"Then there is plenty of time. Ten minutes will see you home, and I'm sure you don't take long over your dressing. Elfie, please sit down. If you are going away I shan't have many opportunities of seeing you and-life will be duller than ever. I have a pretty rotten time, and my home-134	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEWistaria Terrace without you this winter will be unendurable. It won't bear so much as contemplating." He broke off, and moved to sudden pity, she sat down. She knew Humphry in these black moods.	"Don't you like your work in town ?" she asked. "I thought you did."	"Oh, that's all right," he said. "It isn't bad as Government jobs go. You're reduced to a machine, but that wouldn't matter if there were anything else. Life's so dull.''	'Is it ? Poor old Flumphry I'm sorry." Sh believed she was safe in saying this, in offering him her sympathy. She had guessed for a long time that he loved her in his own queer fashion, but she (lid not realize that beneath his reserved, crusty, morose exterior there were hidden depths capable of supporting a big and supreme passion, and she certainly heleved she could alvavs keel) him at arm's length. The attitude of sisterly fric'ndliness, of mere camaraderie, that she had never failed throughout their "grown-up" period to adopt towards him, must, if lie had any perspicacity, any understanding of her sex at all, have driven it home that she did not, and never could, return his affection. And in time, too, he would he cured, as men are cured. But she had not reckoned with Humphry. Humphry was of the type that does not get cured, and does not want to be cured, and will not be put off with any woman but the one he really wants. A woman will marry almost anything, because matrimony was, in the first instance, designed for her. She often does not like the man she marries, or the marriage state, but she likes matrimony. A man does not what he likes first and foremost is the woman -marriage in the abstract doesn't appeal to him at all.	Humnphry would never be cured in the sense that he would marry anyone if he could not marry Elfie.Suddenly, to his own amazement, as much as to hers, hefound himself telling her this earnestly, vehemently; foronce his tongue was loosened, speech became easy, words poured from him. She tried to stop him, but as well try to dam an overcharged mill-stream. She got up to leave him, but, seizing her arm, he implored her to stay and hear him to the end ; he was humble, entreating, but compelling.	"But," she cried, "why, why should I hear you ? I cannot marry you, Hnmphry, and it is not fair."	"Fair! To you ?" He was prepared to resent this She almost smiled at his readiness to fly out into anger.	"No, to you Why should you go on showing me your heart ; telling me all this, abasing yourself before me-"	"Abasing!" he broke in, "Is it abasement to love you, Elfie ? Why," cried he, "it is a crowning glorification. I may suffer because of my love for you; but I'd rather haveAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	135the suffering than not have known you and not have loved you	She was touched. She stood there before him, irresolute, trying to find words that would not wound him. She wanted to make it clear that she could never marry him. When she had kept trying to break through his fluidity with "Don't Humphry, don't say any more. Please stop. I can never be your wife. I do not love you, he had waved her protests to one side, refused to listen, said she would change, that she was surprised, shocked, that he knew he shouldn't have spoken so soon after her lather's death ; that he had taken her at a disadvantage, so to speak, but it was her words, what she had said, "She must work',' 'She had no money." That's what had done it. How could he contemplate her going away to work for some beastly woman named Fish when he had money, heaps of it for both. There was the income he derived from his dead father's estate . . . . And he loved her so, he loved her so enormously. . . She could not refuse such love. It would be a waste.She had interrupted him here. "Waste ?" she inquired.	"Yes," said he, "waste of all that is best in me. If you turn me down, I shall go to seed. Any germ of decency I may possess will be snuffed out. I shall he finished."	Then, feeling that she might think he was threatening her, and the words he had spoken were those of a coward, which lie knew them to be, lie withdrew them. "I did not mean it, Elfie. Nothing that helps to make a man better is wasted, but-" for a moment lie covered his face with his hands, he (lid not wish her to see the working of his features. His violence, he knew, was alarming, disturbing her. This was not the way to make love to a girl such as Elfie, a girl who, to him as to others, had always seemed more like a nymph of the woods, pure, withdrawn, a creature more spirit than flesh and blood, a woodland elf, a spirit of spring, of dancing leaves, of running water.	She made to move away again. She felt, after all, there was nothing further to be said. He understood . . . . She looked at his face, pity was at her heart, but she dared not express it. Softly she withdrew a few steps, then he spoke"And is it your last word, Elfie ?""Yes, Humphry.""You will not marry me 1""I cannot," she said, very gently."You do not love me 1'"No.""And you think you will never change ?"	She steeled herself against the pain and the lurking hope in his voice.130	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE'Never," said she.He let her go.HI	Brian and his mother talked late that evening. They all, including Mr. Bull, the curate from Kingston, who had shot over on his Inotor-bicycle for a game of billiards with Mr. Inglehy, had taken their coffee on the verandah. The night was extraordinarily mild for that time of \'ear. Mr. lngleby then carried off Ins guest, and Elfie, on the pka of writing letters, went to her room. In reality, she was so nervously exhausted after her stormy interview with Huniphry, she felt unable to sit through an evening in light talk with Brian, for thus it always resolved itself ; she and Brian talked while Mr. and Mrs. Ingleby, first one and then the other, seemed somehow to disappear upon some pretext or other from the room.	I wonder why she's gone to bed so early," remarked Brian. He sounded aggrieved. He had a lot of things to tell Elfie tonight, things relative to exploration. He had got some fine books from the Free Library, and had had a great talk with the librarian; who had put him on to all sorts of interesting and useful data which he wanted to discuss with Elfin. Girls were so-so unreliable, "You never knew when you'd got 'em," he grumbled to his mother.	"You've always said exactly the opposite in regard to Elfie," smiled Mrs. ingleby.	'She's better than most," said Brian, "but she's not been as stable of late as she might. Women, Mother," he stretched himself on a low hammock chair and lighted a cigar, "should always be there.''	There ?" Mrs. Inglehy pretended not to understand. When her husband and son were what she described as aggressively masculine with the masculinity of Eastern potentates, she loved to draw them out. Men were so dear, when they were largely grand and superior.	"Always about-in chairs, looking nice and restful, and not busy."I see," said Mrs. Ingleby.	"It's.awoman's province to be in the home. It's an oldiaslaoned idea, I know, and I expect the modern girl would scream if she heard me give expression to such a sentiment, hut l3lfie is not like the modern girl.""Still, she must go to bed."	"But not at this hour. It's barely nine o'clock." Brian rt'sentfully fixed his chair at a different angle and staredAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	137moodily at his mother as she sat placidly in the light of a shaded lamp while playing with a bit of white woolly crochet work-a baby's bonnet. (Mrs. Ingleby supplied all the mothers in Water Lane with bonnets for their babies.)	"1 expect she wants to he fresh tomorrow, looking her best and most competent.""Why ?"Mrs. Inglehy told him of the prospective interview in town."It's ridiculous," he cried, with heat."What ?''	Insisting upon leaving us and going oft to some bally woman as a housemaid."'Housekeeper," corrected his mother.	''It's nearly the same thing, or will prove to be. I know what these women are, they call their employees something grand and then work them like cab horses.""Have you had wide experience in the matter 1'"Yes," said Brian brazenly.Mrs. Ingleby laughed.	"I can't think how you can laugh. Elfie doesn't look fit to fight the world."'I'm not making her go," said Mrs. ingleby mildly.	"Well, why does she insist ? What's her game ? Isn't she happy here P'"No."Brian started"She's not P'	"She won't be happy anywhere-yet. In secret, she's fretting dreadfully for her father. She must have time before she's better. Only time will help her. She says work will absorb her thoughts and make her forget, if only from one hour to the next, the ever-present blank in her life."	"Poor little Elfie," said Brian softly. He flicked the end of his cigar against an ash-tray and looked out into the warm, soft darkness of the night. The air was full of the scent of a garden in autumn ; dying leaves lying thick upon grass drenched with dew damp earth which had given of its best and was now making ready for its winter sleep lingering and pungent odours of a bonfire which still smouldered somewhere away in the direction of the kitchen garden and over all, faint but unmistakable, bringing with it a sense of sadness,	et of strange and indescribable hope, the rotten-sweet smell of decay.	"Then there's her pride," said Mrs. Ingleby. "She absolutely refuses to live upon our charity, that's how she put it.""Pride be blowed	"1 know, but what can one do ? I've argued till I'm tired. If only she'd marry."138	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"Marry!" Had his mother said, "If only she'd become a missionary," Brian could not have sounded more surprised and annoyed."Yes. She's certain to marry some day, so why not now 1'"But whom could she marry ?""There's Humphry."	"Hum p/ivy / Why should she marry Humphry more than any man ?""Because he's so in love with her.""But that isn't a sound reason for marrying a man,'	"N-o, perhaps not; but some men, men of Humphry's type, are persistent, persevering They never take a refusal, and girls give in.""Elfie wouldn't."	''I don't know," said Mrs. lngleby thoughtfully. "This evening--she made pretence of being busy at the baby's bonnet, but her eyes were on her son's partly averted face"I saw them-Elfie and Humphry, walking together by the river in the direction of Isleworth Ferry. I was in the garden when they passed. They did not see me. Elfie did not return till nearly half past seven ; you will recollect she was late for dinner. Dear me, isn't that the sound of a billiard ball fallingI hope Mr. Bull is not losing his temper."	"Elfie walking by the river with Humphry I Yet she wouldn't go out with me.""No.""She said she must go to Colonel \Vyckham's.""Yes,""I wonder if that was an excuse.""Possibly."Brian felt irritated by his mother's monosyllabic replies.	"Well, I don't," he said hotly. "I'm sure she doesn't care a toss of a button for Humphrey. She couldn't.""Why ?" inquired Mrs. Ingleby."Oh, he's not her sort."	"Who is her sort ?" With a curious sense of elation Mrs. Ingleby bent low over her work.	"That I don't know; but certainly not Humphry-he's too dull for one thing."	"Dull! Humphry! Why, he's a most clever man, and I know Elfie thinks so, too. He doesn't say much, but clever men often have to be dragged, as you drag a pond in search of -of suicides."	"What a horrid simile! Anyhow, I shouldn't care to do the dragging." He fell into a reverie, his lips expelling soft rings of smoke. Mrs. Inglehy, her bone crochet needle accomplishing "doubles" and "trebles" and "chains" with even and unhurried precision, sat in restful silence-heAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	139greatest attraction, in the eyes of her husband, was her tranquillity when desired and her energy when necessary. She was the sort of woman who knew how to make men happy and contented. Occasional]y she glanced up at her son's face, It wore an absorbed, a debating look, a look which might have been expressed in the words '1 wonder 2 . . . . . . . . . .	For long they sat thus. The sound of the click of balls came from the blliard-room at the far end of the portico the light m F:lfie's room, which had thrown a shaft of brightness across the garden path, disappeared. RIfle had been reading Sonnets from the Portuguese, and occasionally a tear had dropped upon the pages. Now she tried to sleep.	Mrs. Inglehy folded up her work in a white silk handkerchief and rose.	am going to bed, Brian. Mr. Bull stays so late I cannot pretend to sit up for him Good night.' She stooped over his chair and kissed him affectionately. He returned it with warmth. Brian was very fond of his mother.''1 am going out for a little while '' he said.'At this hour	"I don't feel like sleep, and I do feel like a walk by the river. Good night, Mother." He went down the steps to the lawn. She stood and watched him. It was too (lark to distinguish his features, but she saw him turn when he was half-way down the slope and look up at Elfie's window. He stood for a minute thus, and, being a mother with a sense of special divination towards her offspring, she knew that his face still wore that debating, preoccupied expression.CHAPTER VIIN WHICH Ei.eIR RECEIVES A DOUBLE OFFER OF ASITUATION AND MARRIAGEBRIAN was in a temper. Not just ruffled or "put out" in agrown-up, dignified manner, but in the sort of temper thatleads one to hang about rooms and kick anything handy, andslam doors and make a lot of unnecessary noise. He was inthe library-fortunately alone. Mr. Inglehy was at MidSurrey Golf Links, doing wonders on the greens. Mrs.Ingleby had gone to a Babies' Health Committee, and Eluiehad just started for town to fulfil her engagement with Mrs.I140	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEFish. And t was Elfie who was the cause of Brian's ebullition 1 temper.Ec had asked her to abandon the Fish woman.And she wouldn't.	He had asked her to abandon all idea of any sort of work whatsoever.And she wouldn't.	He had asked her (humouringly) if she must work, might it be daily, so that she could still make her home at Cholmondeley Court.And still she wouldn't,	Becoming ruffled, he said she was obstinate; and she only smiled.	Then he pronounced her pig-headed; and glancing at the clock, she wondered if it were right, as she had a train to catch.	Ignoring this, he started next on some well-reasoned and incontrovertible arguments as to why she shouldn't work, her unsuitability for manual labour, her inefficiency for mental, her-suddenly she was not there. She had disappeared. He had but turned to the mantelpiece for matches, and-she had vanished as soundlessly and completely as ft cinema film. Five minutes later he caught a glimpse of her hurrying to catch her train.	The unreasonableness of women, the stupidity, the the mulishness That was it, it was mulishness. RIfle didn't want work. She couldn't want it. She could not want to go and work for a strange woman named Fish. Nobody could. No reasonably intelligent girl could, so it must be plain mulishness.	Brian sat down and dwelt upon RIfle's mulishness. It was a defect in her character lie had not hitherto suspected, and it was a very unpleasant one. He became calmer while he envisaged it. His memory recalled her through the years. She had not been mulish as a little girl. Had not her great attraction been her pleasant quality of 'giving in ?" Her adaptability, her amenability, had been her outstanding excellences ; and, grown-up, these excellent qualities had remained with her-up till now. Was she (Brian's cigarette was arrested suddenly in mid-air) becoming suffragettishWas she becoming strong-minded, masculine? Would she develop biting and kicking habits? He dwelt upon it, this last contingency. Would Rifle begin to bite. He could not imagine it. He could not see Elfie biting policemen's legs. Always she had appeared so innately refined. But one never knew. The gentlest woman-with a "bee in her bonnet"had been known to develop vicious and criminal instincts.	Stroud appeared. He came about the car. Mr. Brian at breakfast had mentioned lie would require the car, but hadAN UNI)RLSSED Iii,RO1NL	[41not stated at what hour, Brian, eoijitdent 01 success, ad ordered the car [or liimsell and lLllie. It was a pleaant morning. It would be a pleasant drive (when she had given in) through autumn-tinted lanes to Virginia Water-they would take Windsor Park en route, and so on. And nowalone, Virginia Water did not appeal to him. Virginia Water called for company, pleasant companionship. Virginia Water by oneself would be dull, it would he depressing, autumnal, damp, sodden. With Elfie-And not with Elfie .Of a sudden Brian's face lifted. \\ by not with Elfie-still. She would be finished with Mrs. Fish at least by one-thirty, possibly before. Then there could be lunch and-Virginia Water. If Elfie had been engaged by Mrs. Fish, such an engagement did not forbid her going to Virginia Water; or if she had not been engaged, it was all the more reason she should go, because Virginia Water would cheer her up. All this Brian thought in a quarter of a minute while Stroud waited. And Stroud was so deferential and sort of selfeffacing that it didn't even appear to be that.	"I shall require the car at hall past twelve, Stroud,'' said Biian, with splendid decision.Stroud bowed and withdrewLI	Brian was outside the Criterion-the car drawn up close to the kerb-at 12.55, and was feeling cheerful and satisfied with himself. The car had run well, lie had done a fine bit of steering in a congested part of Piccadilly, the sun was shining nicely now after a heavy shower of rain, and he was anticipating with complacency and assurance the start of pleasure Elfie would give when her eyes alighted upon him seated there.	Precisely at one o'clock he descried her dodging the traffic in Piccadilly Circus as lightly as a hare; and the pavement gained, she approached the restaurant, looking neither to the right nor left. Brian watched her with interest, and tried to gauge what his impression of her would have been had this been the first time he had seen her. Her black, to begin with, offended his eye. It did not suit her. By no means did it suit her. She was too slight, too delicately formed, for sombre hues. Black was for big, fair, superb women with a commanding presence. Elfie should be clothed only in light, airy, and slightly, perhaps, bizarre garments, not overdone, but just sufficiently fantastic to serve as a setting to her charming and unusual face. A thick, black, badly-cut serge skirt was a positive crime on her. And she was carrying a waterproof, not even a smart mackintosh, or workman-like Burberry or covert coating, but an old-fashioned black waterproof, a thing2	A N	U N ii K K S S K 1)	Ii ii K 0 I N Kwith flapping wide sleeves and a horrible little cape. Her hat, old-fashioned in shape-where did JLlfie find those hatsBrian wondered almost angrily-trimmed with a jagged edged and combative-looking cheap black quill, was a positive abomination to the eye. And lastly her gloves-black cotton l That finished him. Loose, black, inclined-to-turn-brown, cheap cotton gloves I A woman carrying a waterproof had always outraged his sense of the fitness of things. Waterproofs were designed to be worn, and not carried. Should showers overtake waterproofiess women, they, the unprepared ones, should at once step into taxis or omnibuses. Waterproofs carried were bad enough, but black cotton gloves were worse! Brian felt downright indignant with Elfie. She, who was so lovely, and as Nature had designed her so attractive, to turn herself into such a guy! She passed the car without observing it or its occupant. There was an intent look on her face, an eager look. She was in quest-not of love, of happiness, of fun, of amusement, of pretty clothes, all that make up life to the average young girl-but of a post as housekeeper to a Mrs Fish she had never seen and Mrs. Fish and Mrs. Fish's needs occupied the whole of her mental horizon to the entire exclusion of everything else in the universe	Brian decided to let her pass into the restaurant without calling attention to the fact that he was there awaiting her. She would not obtain the situation, he believed and hoped. She looked so young. She was neither robust nor large enough to tackle the administration of a large household, for Mrs. Fish had mentioned that the family, including a governess and servants and children, numbered twelve. No, certainly this morning Elfie looked unequal to twelve persons' tastes and idiosyncrasies in the food question, and the bed question, and the lighting and heating questions, and all the other questions that crop up for consideration in the daily life of people who are able to afford to indulge in tastes at all.	"She won't get it," thought Brian, "and she'll come out depressed and hungry and rather inclined to err', and I shall be here to make things right for her. Poor little Elfie."III	Immediately following Elfic's entrance to the restaurant, a girl came out and stood on the step of the vestibule for a brief space (but a yard or two from Brian), before passing out into the crowd. She was a girl with a peering shortsighted sort of nose. A nose very long, and compressed at the nostrils, just as though they had been held together by a troeser evel i n Cil1), aol she tlriist this nose ont towardsAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	143the crowded pavement like a scenting spaniel, while she spok supposedly to herself but in a quite i:udil>le voice, and one that was full of despondency. ''She'll get it-the last gii I. She'll get it because Mrs. Fish' '-Brian pricked up his ears"has nobody left to talk to, and she's got to engage somebody. If I'd been the last I might have got it and as it is-'' She clutched at her umbrella-a commissionaire was staring at her-and with nose well forward she dived into the crowd.	Brian smiled and muttered to himself : ''Poor devil I I'm glad Fin not a woman down on my luck looking for a job, especially with a nose like that.''	He leant back comfortably in his seat and lighted a cigarette, and many a girl glanced twice at the good-looking, wellgroomed young man as lie lolled there in the October sunshine. He found the world a pleasant habitation, and the world found him a very personable person to look upon: of this ie was conscious, and, naturally, was contented.	Five, ten, fifteen minutes passed, then a sound of a woman's voice, high-pitched, hurried, smote upon his ears, and a smallish, plump, and smartly dressed lady appeared, racing through the restaurant doorway at top speed, to the manifest horror.of the gorgeous commissionaire who guarded it, and hailed a passing taxi at the top of her voice. In her wake was Elfle, a bewildered, bemused RIfle, to whom the excitable lady threw over her shoulder a running fire of comments, explanations, and directions. "So glad it's settled satisfactorily to us both. I know I shall like you, and I shan't bother about references because you look honest." (Several passers by, the commissionaire, and the driver of the arrested taxi, which he had brought up to the kerb with a heavy application of brakes, bent their interested gaze upon the person so addressed, and RIfle shrinkingly tried to conceal herself behind a big tub of white marguerites.) "I can tell an honest person at a glance. Can't you ? And you'll come tomorrow, I mean Thursday. Sure you can't manage tomorrow and pack tonight? No. Well, all right. Come down by this train-it's the best-and we'll meet you. Goodbye. I must fly. Believe I've missed the train as it is. Let me see, have I your address ? WhatOh yes: Cholmondeley Court, Richmond. Charming place, Richmond-I believe. I've never been there, but-" with her tight skirts raised as high, and a little higher than strict propriety, even in these days of "conceal nothing", would have approved, the lady took a sort of sidelong jump into the taxi-cal)--"I know all about it: Thomson's Seasons, the 'Star and Garter', and Maids of Honour-delicious little tartsand all that sort of thing. Goodbye, Miss Coddington-I mean Charrington-Waterloo" (the last with a shriek and her head out of the window to the grinning driver), "and go as fast as144	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEyou dare, '1' he taxi hounded forward (no time for turning movements) to the Strand, and disappeared round the corner of the CircusTV	Elfie, with a sharply expelled breath, quitted her cover -the tub of marguerites-and stepped on to ilie pavement. She immediately caught sight of Brian, stood startled for an instant, and then burst out laughing. The surprise, the pleasure of the recognition was momentarily eclipsed by the bewilderment of her senses caused by the astonishing Mrs. Fish. She felt she had emerged from a cataclysm, and, amazingly, was safe. Yet she could laugh. She could laugh because she was scatheless; because, and this brought a sense of exhilaration, she had obtained the situation over the heads of thirty other girls-these had been interviewed at the rate of twelve an hour, or a girl every five minutes-and because the man she loved was unexpectedly seated before her."Did you see her ?" she asked eagerly, advancing to the car.	"I both saw and heard her. Good God, Elfie !" Brian mopped at his face as he got out and held the door open. "You don't mean to say you've got it ?""I have."'But you're not going to her. Good Heavens I""Why not ?""Get in and I'll tell you."	'I can't Where are you going, and what are you doing here ?"	"I've conic for you We're going to lunch first and then to Virginia Water.""But-""Please get in, Elfie, and don't argue. I'm starving."	Elfie laughed. "I'm sorry, but I can't come with you. I've no time. I must go and shop. I've heaps to do before Thursday, when I go down to Loamgate. I must get another evening frock-I've to (line with them, the Fishes, and she likes the 'companion'-that's what I'm to be called, 'companion to Mavis'-to be dressy-horrid expression-and smart."	"But you can't go to her. You'd be dead in a weekdead from exhaustion, from noise, from a Niagara in full blast. It's impossible. We wouldn't hear of it-mother and-I." There was just the faintest emphasis on the pronoun, and Elfie, try as she would, could not prevent a rush of colour to her cheeks. Quickly, with head turned, she became absorbingly occupied with the doings of a London and NorthAN iJNnREssitr) IIERO!Nit	145W(-tern Railway vait at the corner ot the Circus, but Brian had perceived the tell-tale colour and he was prompt to size his advantage.	Elfie, we can't discuss the matter here. People are listening. Please got in. The ]rock can wait. It can be sent after you. You can get it at Duckling's. It would be sinful to waste such an afternoon in shopping, besides, there's no hurry. You won't he going there-to the Fish woman, anyhow. So you might as well come.'	'I shall be going. I've promised. And I want to go, I like her, and nothing would induce me to break my engagement with her. I'm sorry, Brian. It was nice of you to come for inc, but I cannot spare the time.''	"Rubbish I" he interrupted. "How long will it take you to buy this dress ?""Ah hour at least."	"Then I'll wait for you. We'll go and have lunch first. Then buy the dress and then Virginia Water. Come, Elfie, I've thrown everything over for you, all engagements" (and Brian really thought that he had), "you wouldn't he so horrid, so unkind, as to let me down, would you ?"	He looked down into her face entreatingly and with just the old touch of masterfulness in his bearing that had ever been the undoing of Elfie. She yielded. He helped her into the car climbed in himself, and pulled the door to with a bang of sal isfact inn.V	[hey argued the whole of the afternoon. They argued during their lunch at the Trocadoro and the waiter, till he caught sight of RIfle's left hand, had dubbed them married. They argued on their way to the purchasing of RIfle's gown, and they even argued as to where the gown should be bought; Brian suggested Harrod's, RIfle insisted upon Leicester Square, as being cheaper. They argued the entire distance to Virginia Water, that is to say once the crowded streets had been left behind ; and five o'clock found them seated by the lake still exhausted, Brian, chewing at the stem of his pipe, irritated almost to rudeness. And the debatable subject was, of course, should Rifle go to Loamgate or should she notBrian was determined she should not go.RIfle was equally determined she should.	They were now at a deadlock. Nothing was left but for one or the other to yield.	Brian kept telling himself he could not get over Rifle's unreasonableness, her obduracy. She appeared in a new140	AN UNDRESSED HEROINElight to him- Indeed, she was somewhat of a shock. "Mulish" he had called her in the morning. Now she was something more and infinitely worse-she was ''bard''. She thought only of self. She was hard with the hardness of a granite woman. He looked at her as she reclined against the tree. She had taken off her hat, and her hair, blown about her forehead by a fresh but warm little wind, caught the last gleams of the lambent autumn sunshine. Her cheeks were flushed with the excitement of their discussion from the low, black collar of her coat her neck rose pale, slender, and her eyes, with their fringe of short, thick lashes, were closed. She looked wonderfully young, alluring, and sweet, and Brian, as he gazed upon her and noted the droop of her lips, childlike in their pathos, wondered how so feminine and slender a thing could he so stubborn and granity. He said as much. He sat down beside her and commented upon it. Up to now lie had, he said, always felt her nature to be so yielding, so plastic, so submissive. She remained with her eyes closed. He repeated his remark-with emphasis. Her eyes were glued, and a little sigh escaped her. He essayed other tactics he referred to her selfishness, her cruel selfishness.	She started a little and opened her eyes. This was a new aspect of the case. "Selfish ?" cried she ; "to whom ?" She turned to look at Brian, whose face was very close to hers, and lie saw that there were tears in her eyes-great big ones, ready to brim over; and of a sudden be saw (for the first time in his life) that those eyes so like wet flowers were the loveliest in the world, and the tremulous mouth below the very sweetest. And as he saw these things there was a queer and quite unfamiliar stirring of his heart and senses, and a desire, which in the first realization rather astounded him, to kiss those lips. Indeed, so amazed was he at this unexpected sensation that he played with it, reflected upon it for a brief space. What did it mean ? Was he in love with Elfie and had only just discovered it ? Or did his keen wish that she should remain with them at Cholmondehey Court merely mean that the loss of her sympathetic companionship, if she persisted in going, was more than he felt inclined to face ? Brian had been so accustomed throughout his life to have what he wanted."Selfish ?" she repeated. She did not know of the bewilder-ment of his mind nor of the acceleration of his heart-beats. Weeks ago she had made up her mind that he would never care for her as she cared for him that he would never be more than a tender and affectionate friend ; and she had been steeling herself to face life and make the best of it without him. Even during his earnest and reiterated appeals to her this afternoon, not to go to Loamgate, she had kept her head. She could c' ad Brian like a hook She was more than conscious that he desiredAN		UNDRESSED i-1EROINE	147her friendship and nothing more, So how could she now divine that his feelings had, if only momentarily, undergone a change ? She was unversed in the curious and fickle psychology of man.	"Yes,' said he, and he bent still closer to her till his eyes were on a level with her face and he could feel her breath upon his cheek ; 'because because-Elfie, I want you-" He stopp'd What was he saying ? What was he going to say ? His head swam. He struggled with himself, and for control. He didn't really love Elfie. He was sure lie didn't.	Yet-what was the meaning of this wild hammering at his heart ? Why did he of a sudden so desperately long to kiss her ? He had never felt like this before. "RIfle," he murmured thickly, "you won't go-you won't be so cruel. 1-" He was coming closer and closer, now his arms were stealing about her, all his virile sense aroused by the halffrightened shy look she cast at him, a look of wonderment, of wistful appeal, yet a look that seemed to say, "Come no further . . . . Yet come."	"RIfle," he whispered, "may I kiss you P 1-" Suddenly, wildly, uncontrolledly, he crushed his lips against hers, and, at feeling their sweet responsiveness, he strained her to his heart. "I love you, Elfie, I love you. You must not go-I want you to be my wife," he cried,CHAPTER VIIELFIE'S FRIENDS ON HER ENGAGEMENTOr all the people in Richmond, save, of course, Mrs. Ingleby, Mr. Dobbs was the most pleased and excited at the announcement of the engagement.Elfie told him herself.	For two pins, and but for the fortunate fact (for her) that his hands were fishy-lie had been cutting a large eel into sections for Miss Doyle, for stewing, eels being cheap that day-RIfle was of the opinion he would have taken her into his arms and embraced her.	He beamed with delight. Rising suns over Swiss mountains were not in it. Every corner of the little shop seemed to overflow with congratulatory exuberance; the very kippers appeared miraculously more cheerful and less flattened out,i4	AN	NORE55Li) HER01NF,and a canary in the parlour behind-Mr. Dobbs was fond of small birds-broke into sudden, raptucous song.	I not glad, Miss Elfie. I couldn't be more glad if it was my own little Nell come back to life and herself engaged to Mr. Jones at the end of the Lane, who, harrin' his name, is the most promising young grocer in Richmond, which is sayi2i' a good deal, when you think of all the sharp young assistants at Floppins' Stores round the corner, 1 always knew on and Mr. Brian would make it up together. 1 felt it in my heart.'' Mr. Dobbs made a somewhat fruitless effort to lay his hand upon the spot where his heart should have been reposing, but finding it more difficult than he had expected, he gave it up, and went in search of Mrs. Dobbs. The little shop, left void by his exit, effected in his curiously soundless fashion, reminded Elfie of a vacant china mould from which the blancmange had just been evacuated. Site and the fish might not have been there at all, so great was the sense of space created when Mr. Dobbs withdrew from an environment. She smiled to herself. Extraordinarily happy was Elfie today, and without any sense of disloyalty to her father She felt that he knew and was happy and corn felted by her happiness that he was there about her, glorying in her happiness. She had whispered to him in the night that she would always miss him, always want him, never forget himthat her life could never be quite the same now that he had been taken away. But Brian's love would just make all the difference-from despair she had climbed, of a sudden, to hope She knew her father would understand, he who had always understood everything.	Mr Dobbs was back, followed by Mrs. Dobbs, with her hair in curlers-long, steel, and quite alarming-looking curlers -and a red-and-white apron with chess-board effects.	"I knew it," she cried, as she took Elfie's hand in her own fresh from chopping onions. "It happened yesterday ?"	"Well, yes-i wanted to tell you at once myself, before anybody else-'	"There, Mr. Dobbs!'' Mrs. Dobbs looked triumphantly at her husband. "Didn't I tell you ? A stranger in my tea in the morning, and fell upstairs in the afternoon. You laughed at me, you made fun of me, because you was put out at a person who calls herself a lady briagin' back a haddock she says wasn't quite fresh, and which was nothin' but an excuse, 'cos she'd seen one up at Chrisp's a penny a pound cheaper. The Hill will have a lot to answer for in tryin' to undersell us down below-some day it'll be judged like Sodom and Tomorrer--"But-''	"You wait, Miss Elfie, I'm coming to it-shop, Mr. Dobbs" -Mrs. Dobbs was apparently oblivious of the fact that the\N ONTIIIESSED hEROINE	T .f9pi;Lce in qucti 'u was incapable of accommodating so much is another sprat-"a gentleman after winkles. Step¥ iside.''Fortunately the gentleman after winkles, a thin man withne eye protected by a shade, had the sense not to attempt elpossibilities, and remained outside while being served. With his one good eye he stoopingly assured himself he was receiving good measure, and on his retiring Mrs. Dobbs resumed: "When the person who calls herself a lady had flung the haddock slap into a basket of cockles, and I'd much ado to keep myself from slappin' 'er in the face in return, I happened to look up whilst sayin' to mcself, 'Bridle your tongue, Mrs. Dobbs'-I always says that twice under my breath when I want to be rude to customers-and I saw you and Mr. Brian parsin' along the end of the Lane in his motor-car-the Green end-where it's nice and quiet, and he was leanin' towards you and talkin' very 'ard, sounded like arguin'. He was drivin' very slow-Mr. Dobbs, even, could have got out of his way-and I says to myself, 'He's askln' her to marry him, or my name's not Arabella Dobbs.' Now, wasn't he ?"	"Well, not exactly.' Elfie couldn't find it in her heart to disappoint Mrs. Dobbs.	"But he was leadin' up to it in the way they do. The trouble I had with Mr. Dobbs when he was leadin' up I I knew what he was after; he used to sit and stare at 'is feethe could see them in those days-but 'e seemed as though he couldn't speak. I 'ad to help him out at the last, and that's what I expect you 'ad to do with Mr. Brian. They're shy like. Mr. Dobbs used to look like a great, stupid sheep, usen't you, Mr. Dobbs ?"	Mr. Dobbs nodded and made a sudden lunging movement across the Lane. Alf, who had superseded Bert, and several other errand-boys, was staring and listening. All the year round he seemed to stare and listen, and to attend to everything but his own affairs. Mr. Dobbs was convinced he would come to a bad end, and frequently told him so, to which AU responded with a vibratory sort of five-fingered exercise on the end of his nose.	Elfie thanked the Dobbses for their kind words and congratulations, and went on to Colonel Wyckham. She knew the old man-he had become strangely old and shrunken since the death of the Major, and very, very sad-would be immensely pleased and cheered by her news. He grieved for her, she was aware, day in, day out, and that his sleep was broken and his hours were spent in vain regrets and longing for the man who had given up his life for him.'My dear," he cried tremulously, taking her two hands in150	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEhis, 'this is great news. I am very, very glad. And you are happy ?"'Yes," she replied.'You love him ? You are not marrying because-"	''Oh no,'' she interrupted him. ''1 am not that sort I would rather work my fingers to the bone than marry for the sake of marrying. 1 have always cared for Brian." A soft colour crept into her checks. 'And 1 know my father wished it, and would have been glad.''	"And is glad," said the Colonel, trying to steady the trembling of his lips.	"And is glad," agreed Elfie, and lifting up her face she kissed the old man very gently on his silver hair.ii	Hemphry took it badly. He did not hear for a week. Miss Doyle was away-a rare event for her and an interlude of peace for Humphry and the servants-so the gossip of the place had not penetrated to the Doyle household.Elfie told him herself.	She met him one evening at the entrance to Wardrobe Court. He was on his way home, a roundabout way, but one that he frequently took, partly for the pleasure of seeing the little old-world Court in the tender light of evening, when peace seemed to brood in every mellowed stone and slate and chimney-stack of the Old Palace, but chiefly in the hope of a chance encounter with Elfie.	Because she had refused his offer of marriage a week ago, Flomphrv in no sense felt called upon to avoid her. He adnjitted his defeat now, at the moment, but he did not regard it as final. He intended to go on asking her to marry him till either she gave in or married somebody else, and even if she did marry somebody else he still would not be without hope, because the man might die. Husbands did die, it was a common occurrence and when Huinphry came to reflect upon it, they died much more than their wives. Ehlie might become a widow. He felt no shame when he envisaged the idea of her widowhood What he wanted above everything in the world sas to marry her himself, and lie was of the stuff that never gives in, never knows when it is beaten.	It struck him that she looked brighter and happier as she came along the little Court towards the old archway which gave access to the Green, and his own heart lifted. It hurt I him physical] v to know tinit sin: suffered and grieved -so muchfor her 1; it) er.AN UNDRESSED EEROINE	151	"So you are not gone ?" he remarked, when she paused and greeted him a little shyly, and with her eyes on the ground. They had not met since his vehement love-making."Gone ?" she echoed,	"To that woman. You were after a situation when I last saw you."	"Oh yes." Elfie had forgotten Mrs. Fish entirely in her new-found happiness."Didn't you get it ?""I did."	"And when do you go?" Humphry was always very direct in his questions.	not going." Elfle felt painfully embarrassed. She felt she must tell him about Brian and herself, but how find words ? She wanted not to hurt him more than she could help, but she knew whatever she said, however she put it, she was bound to deal him a nasty blow. And she was so fond of Humphry and so sorry for him: sorry for his queer, depressed, taciturn nature, and that his home was so dull and cheerless. She floundered about. Humphry was waiting for her to continue and explain why she wasn't going; he did not question her, he just waited. He was of the waiting sort.	Then she told him. She told him with her eyes on a new slender moon, which had suddenly appeared, a pale sickle of silver, above the top of an elm tree in the soft dark blue of the evening sky.	Then, for quite a time, it seemed to her there was absolute silence in the Court. Even some parcel-delivery vans and horses which found sanctuary at night in some ancient stabling opposite to the Old Palace seemed to have hushed their noise and clattering of wheels and crunching of hoofs, and Elfle could distinctly hear Humphry catch at his breath. Presently she ventured to glance at him, and what she saw startled her into asking him if he were ill, his face had become so white and set and bleak.He shook his head.	She stood before him miserably. She longed to offer him some word of sympathy, of comfort. But how could she? It was so difficult.	"I am sorry, Humphry," was all she dared to venture upon. Then, as he did not speak, she moved away.	"Wait," he cried harshly. "I want to say something to you. I can't congratulate you, Elfle.""No," she said meekly."I expected this. But-yet it's a shock.""Is it ?" She averted her eyes from his twitching face.	"I hope you are happy. I care for you enough to wish that-at least I think I do, though I'm not sure."I152	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE"Thank you," she said, and she smiled at his honesty."And you are happy ?" he asked her abruptly."Quite,""And you expect to marry Brian?'"Of course." She looked at him in surprise."Well, i say you won't."She started. "Really; Humphry-"	He brushed her protest to one side. "I repeat it you will never marry Brian unless he strangely alters"What do you mean ?"	"He does not love you-forgive me. 1 don't want to hurt you, but you will have to know. You're bound to know sooner or later; you're clever, discerning. You'll find out he does not love you. You can't help it, cant help finding it out. He's incapable of loving you, for he loves only himself. Good God, to think you don't know it when you've known Brian all these years it's extraordinary, incredible. 1-"	"Humphry, be quiet. How dare you !" Now she was very angry, her voice shook with passion. "How dare you say such a thing I""I'm sorry," he muttered, "but it's true."	"It's not true. And even if it were, what right have you to say so"The right that I love you myself."	"Pah	You call that love, and yet you can hurt me so.',	"I want to warn you before it's too late. If you marry Brian you will never cease to regret it."	"I shall never cease to regret it if I don't marry him. Remember, I love him. I love him above everything in the world. You do not know what such love means. If I were not to marry Brian I think that I should-die."	lie winced at her words. There was a terrible intentness in her voice and manner, and for a moment hope died within him and he looked away, unable to bear the light of love that flashed to her dark eyes as she spoke, the light of love for another man.	She saw his movement of misery, her heart softened, and her anger fell away from her. He was suffering. He did not know what he was saying. She could afford to be generous.	"You do not mean what you say, Humphry." She spoke gently, laying a hand upon his arm. There was no one about. They and some noisy rooks in the high elms had the little Court to themselves.	"But I do. I mean every word I have said. I am sorry if they have hurt you, Elfie." She was looking up into his face with such lovely wistful eyes that though he wrestled with himself to maintain his harshness, it broke down beforeAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	153her appeal, and a wave of love and tenderness for her swept through him. Brushing away her hand he folded his own arms tightly as though fighting against a strong desire to take her into them.	You really mean that you think Brian doe.. not love me She could scarcely frame the words."I said so.""But you do not mean it ?" she repeated.''But I do.''''\\'hy, then, has he asked me to marry him	1 am not good at conundrums. Possibly lie would miss von if von went away lie has learnt to look to you for many things, you are so kind, so unselfish. Always you have danced to his piping. 1 like Brian. Most people like him, but one cannot shut one's eyes to his innate selfishness. He's not good enough for you, o, to put it in a better way, you are too fine hr him.''	''And not, I presume, too fine for you ?'' she asked, with her eyes again on the little slip of a moon.	lie was restive under her irony, but he did not flinch. 'Yes," he replied gravely, and there was a humility in his eeents, "too fine for both of us, but I, at least, possess the -eying grace of loving you."	'Oh," she cried, her anger returning, "how you harp on i Nat And-" She put her hands over her eyes for an eitant, as though to blot out something painful from lierion, ''how cruel you are, how selfish How horribly selfish,nmphry I You say you care for me, and you give me this en, You talk of Brian's selfishness. Selfishness What 1 out you ? You-'"Yes? Go on."	"Who are, and always have been, the most selfish man ii the world.''"1)0 you think so ?"''I do,'' she said.''Have I ever been selfish to you ?"''Perhaps not, but there are others your uncle and aunt, 'ur friends, acquaintances, people who have certain claims E;en you. Have you ever put yourself out a hair's-breadtha single living creature in your life	lie reflected. ''No, I don't think 1 have. I have never t:sught of it. But I could try. I could learn if it would give'ii pleasure."Pleasure I'' She gave a scornful little laugh. lie had nded her so munch, she cared not now how she hurt himiturn. "What you do is a matter of supreme indifference	en'. I am not your guide and mentor."	''that is true,'' he returned sln\\ lv	''hut as you have154	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEpointed out that which you consider to he my besetting sin -I thought you might he sufficiently interested-''	'But fin not. I take no interest in you it's irnpossibe. Our friendship is at end. A few minutes back I was happy and I -Tin still happy." Proudly she lifted her head, ''I don't believe a word of what you have said It'; not true. You have put horrid ideas, suggestions into my mind, but they shall not stay there. 1 shall stamp them out. I-" Her voice was quivering she was wrestling with her tears.¥ , . That Humphry, her old friend, should have presentedher with such a horrible idea, Humphry, who prolesedly cared for her. "Oh I" she cried, in a sudden gust ol doubt and misery. "How could you ?"	Then she turned about and fled away from him back to Cholmondeley Court.CHAPTER VIIIELFIE SHUTS HER EYESTHEY were seated in two roomy chairs in front of the library fire at that pleasant hour midway between tea and dinner.	Outside, November was weeping along the river banks for the lost summer and departing autumn. Her tears hung irom the few yellow, faded wisps of leaves which still clung tenaciously to the willows on the Beloved Isle. A white mist had descended upon the meadows which lay opposite to Cholmondeley Court and was creeping along towards the bridge, where it meant to brood about the arches if no freshening wind came to disturb it. Duck -of-an-Isle-EliTe could just distinguish its blurred outline from where she sat-was a woebegone, miserable little thing, and Mr. Winks, a heavily overenated, sturdy figure, waited patiently at the Ferry for passengers who did not come, The Bridge, though a devious route for many, was preferable to rivers and boats on an evening so drear and dank.	Brian had piled up the fire, and the room with its panelled walls and morocco chairs and rich carpet-the couple of square feet which had been despoiled by Mr. Inglehy's practice approach shots to the hearthrug, which practice was degeiierating into a habit, were scarcely distinguishable at night-was warm and luxurious, a room which the lovers outside seated in couples along Cholmondeley Walk, clasped in each oilier'sA11~1 uNorc1' 1.11 s31. o 11 0001 NIL			155trios, and whose ardour even the cnlolclnig mists failed to damp, would have given their eyes to possess.	Brian was talking and RIfle was listening ; this was the usual order of things. He liked to talk and she liked to listen, so both were contented.But tonight his speech was a little less fluent than customary.	Ic was trying to say something to her which he found a little awkward. It was, in fact, a suggestion for the postponement ui their marriage to a later date than the one which had been fixed upon. Perhaps it was not surprising that he should 'hum" and "ha" a little, and poke at the fire, and light and icliglit sundry cigarettes. Not that lie feared Elfie would make any trouble about the matter; not that she would be hurt, or silly, or offended. She was too sensible for that sort of thing, too confident of his affection-and he was fond of her. His heart glowed with complacency when he reviewed his own fondness for her, and she was too fond of him and had too much respect and admiration for his judgment to cut up rough at such a trifle as deferring their wedding (originally fixed for January) till the spring-say April. For, after all, it was the weather, the prospect of not only possible but probable had weather for their honeymoon, which was to be a prolonged one (he had so much to show her), which had forced him to the decision that it would he wiser to postpone their wedding till the clays were balmier and brighter. Italy et uld be so cold, he well knew, so very cold in winter, and the I ating of the hotels and houses was so inadequate.	He led up to what lie wanted to say by a reference to the comfort of an English fire. It was such a jolly thing, in spite of what foreigners said to the contrary. It was so ripping to sit up close to one as they were doing now, and be able to bang a poker right into the middle of a compact red-hot mass of coal, and make the flames go roaring up the chimney.	"By the way," he said, "one can't do this sort of thing abroad there are no open fireplaces in Italy.'' Then (anxiously) lie went on to say lie hoped she wouldn't find it cold travelling at January. That he believed they'd made a hit of a mistake and ought to have arranged for their wedding to be in the spring. "Don't you, dear one ?" He took one of her hands	i his and pressed it gently. He had got it out and managed 't beautifully."Perhaps," she agreed. She did not realize he was in	tenest ; their wedding day seemed such a very settled thing. N 'body knew who had settled it. From the very beginning the Nw Year had heen spoken of as the date when "RIfle and I hian would be married." Perhaps it had been Mrs. Inglcbey. She saw no reason for waiting. It would do RIfle good to gettray from I tic hinc I fi and its tonI ties sit lire and as for156	AN	UNDRESSED HEROINEwaiting tor a longer period ol mourning to elapse, she, for one, was sure the dear Major would turn in his grave with annoyance if from a stupid and conventional concession to public opinion his beloved chicken should miss one moment of happiness. She did not say this to Rifle in so many words but she hinted at it.	"You see," Brian continued, ii we'd thought about it at all-but we were in such a hurry, that is to say / was I was so keen on getting married, and can you blame me ?"he smiled into her eyes and, putting out both hands, drew her on to his knee--that we never went into the question of the delight of travelling abroad in the spring. I've done it, so I know-the warmth, the light, the flowers." Brian spoke as though these delights were peculiar only to Continental places in the spring "You don't know, as you've never been abroad, but I do."	RIfle could not suppress a start, for she now perceived that he was in earnest.	"It isn't long from January to April," he continued, stroking her hair and twining round a finger one of the pretty curly tendrils that lay about her ears ; "only three months and what are three nionths when you and I are so happy together here. Eh, darling ?"	"Why, of course,' she cried 'any time, any month you like," The blood rushed to her face, lie was actually pleading with her just as though she were opposing his suggestion. What could lie be thinking of P "1 did not fix upon January; I don't know who did it always seemed to me too soon, Brian. Let us wait six months longer, a year, two years. I am in no hurry." She spoke quickly and a little vehemently, trying to cover the trembling in her voice caused by the clamour at her heart.	Brian looked at her. He saw that she was put out, but did not guess how deep was her distress. RIfle was prouder than he knew.	"You are not vexed: are you ?" lie pulled her face down to his and kissed her lips. "I only threw it out as a suggestion. I hate the very idea of waiting, and we won't wait a moment longer than April, but my reason tells me it will be wise. You are a cold little person wood elves are, you know, and when I think of you in great hare Italian rooms with their ineffectual stoves-you see we are not going to Rome at first, where the art of heating is understood, I want to be there at Easter-it makes me shudder. Why, I dare not contemplate what a frozen little wife I should have. See l''	"Of course I see." RIfle did not point out that there was the whoe of the sunny Riviera at their disposal. She was too engaged in endeavouring to check the hurried beating of herAN UNDRESSED HEROINE 	157pulses, and in wondering why Brian would go on explainingand explaining as if she were contradicting him.	''Then, again, there is another strong reason for our waitig for a month or two. By that time, by the spring, you will have cast your mourning. You promised me you would not remain in black longer than six months."	Elfie left the question of her hypothetical benumbed condition on a January honeymoon, and tried to focus her attention on black clothes. Brian was saving how greatly he disliked black, and black worn by a bride would he anathema. 'It does not suit you.'' He held her to him tenderly, to mitieate, as it were, the severity of his condemnation."Doesn't it ?"	"No, dear. You're too pale for black. I prefer you even in your dingy browns."	"Dingy browns !'' Elfie dwelt upon the words, they made her sit up. Then, to her own surprise, she suddenly found herself laughing. Brian was so in earnest and it was so unimportant. She wasn't offended. She even upbraided herself for her levity."You don't like me in dingy brown ?" she queried."No," he replied with decision."Then I mustn't wear it."	"How dear you are," he said in a pleased way. "Now some girls would have been offended that's where you are such a trump, Elfie."''Is it ?''"Yes, you always take such a sensible view of everything.""Do I?"	"Of course you do, there never was anybody like you." He polled her face down to his shoulder and laid his cheek against hers. He noticed with a shade of perturbation how hot it was, and that she trembled a little.	With a quick movement lie placed her upright on his knee, and leaning towards her, examined her face closely."You're quite sure you're not vexed with me	"Vexed, Brian! How you keep harping on my being vexed ! What do you mean ? Why should I he ?"	"Well, because I-.----" he broke off a little confusedly at the look of inquiry in her candid eyes, and fumbled in his pocket for another cigarette.	"Do you mean because you don't like me in dingy brown and have suggested the postponement of our marriage for a little while"-disengaging herself from his hands, she stood on the hearthrug, confronting him-"because it might be cold ?"	"Well, yes." He struck a match and applied it to the cigarette."But surely that is a matter for gratitude and not vexation.158	AN UNDRESSES) HEROINEIt is so kind of you to consider my comfort to such an extent." She smiled at him to cover the pain that was stirring at her heart. "1 think April will be a delightful month for a wedding, infinitely nicer than cold, bleak January. And it will be quite easily explained to people in fact, so few know that we had fixed upon a date. It will give me longer, too, to prepare my trousseau and settle up my house. If I am not successsful in letting it soon, I must decide, I think, to give notice at the quarter-clay."	"1 should give notice in any case.: Brian was glad to speak of other matters.She shook her head.	'But why ? You will never again live in it. We shall never want it.''	"1 don't know. I seem to cling to it. I love it so." She could not have explained why, but as she uttered the words an overwhelming desire for the beloved little house and her father swept through her being. She moved towards the door on an impulse to be alone."You are not going ?" Brian remonstrated."Yes, to dress for dinner.""But it's too early."'I feel I shall he slow tonight. Good-bye for the present.'She opened the door and closed it gently behind her.H	There was a fire in her room, and sinking into an arm-chair, she held out cold hands to the grateful warmth, and for long she mused on the conversation that had passed between them.	'Humphry would say it's because he doesn't really love me, but-it's not true." She repeated this several times to herself to make quite sure she had got it correctly. "And, after all, there's nothing in it. Why should I mind ? And I don't mind-1 don't mind a bit. Surely we understand one another, Brian and I, and have sufficient faith in one another to-to, well, make a slight alteration in the date of our wedding without getting perturbed and upset about it. January is a vile month, an abominable month, the coldest, bleakest month in the year. The sun never shines in January, and it rains and snows and freezes and thaws and hails and blows the whole	of its thirty-one clays 	But to her mental vision thereflashed a picture Brian once had painted of a little fishingtown on the Italian Riviera in January ''It was just blue he',and blue sea, and pink and yellow houses clustered round thequay, and over all dazzling white-hot sunshine. Sunshine soglorious, so life-giving, so ceonning, that it seemed to percolateAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	159into one's very frozen English being.'' But she thrust it from her, and when it bobbed up, arid bobbed up again, she cried with irritation. 'But it doesn't say there would be bright, hot, warming, percolating sunshine this coming January because it happened once. Probably it would be as cold as a Polar icefield. Brian is right Air April honeymoon will be divine."She shook away determinedly a couple of tears that hadgathered in her eyes and through which the firelight danced.in blurred fantastic fashion, and got up. Vigorously be washed her face in icy water, and to the surprised maid who appeared with a can of hot she said she preferred the cold, arid, no, she required no assistance and no fastening-up tonight. Miss Charrington, with her indifference to her appearance, was a constant source of amazement and disappointment to Mrs. Ingleby's maid, who would have enjoyed having one so young and pretty on whom to practise her capable hands.	A little later Elfie descended the stairs to dinner. She had taken unusual pains with her toilet in spite of her dismissal of Jennings. Her hair, parted above her white, low forehead, was soft and beautiful and as smooth as it would ever consent to be; perhaps a little old-fashioned in its dressing, but she said she never could keep pace with the smart, up-to-date ways of "doing" one's hair, they were too difficult to achieve, and she couldn't spare the time,which really meaat she couldn't find the Interest. Her gown of ninon was cut low at the neck, and as a concession to Brian's distaste for black she had added a quaint little fichu of white. She looked in no sense ci the word well-dressed or modish, but most people would have looked at her twice, impressed by her refinement and sweetness and the elfish charm of her face and carriage. She seemed to drift down the stain more than to walk. Her depression she had cast from her. She loved Brian, and he loved her, he must love her, for had he not asked her to marry him ? That was sufficient.	Mrs. Ingleby awaited her in the drawing-room. She looked well in a handsome gown of amethyst velvet, but her brows were knit in a worried frown.	"What is this I hear from Brian 1¡' The men had not yet descended."What ?" inquired Elfie."That your wedding is to be postponed till April."	"Yes, we think travelling in Italy in the winter will be so cold."	"Ridiculous nonsense, I call it. You could have gone somewhere else first, the world isn't composed of just Italy, is it ?''100	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE'No-	'You could have gone to the Riviera) Egypt, Algiersthose, in all conscience, are warm enough for two young people. Eli ? You might be octogenarians, or a couple of chrysalises Surely the Riviera would have suited you ?"	"V-es"	F'Well, then why not go ?"'Brian thought-"	"You mustn't always consider so much what Brian hinks," snapped Mrs. ingleby. "You must have a will of your own."	"1 could scarcely press for an early marriage if Brian wishes to wait," said RIfle with dignity.	"Yes, you could. You roust show more spirit. Why, you used to be the most spirited thing in the world.""And what about my pride ?" demanded the girl. "Imust either agree to the postponement of our wedding or- F110 wedding at all."	Mrs. Ingleby jumped. "Good gracious!" she ejaculated. 'What are you talking about? No wedding As soon suggest that there's no dinner. You gave me quite a start. Come along, I was only joking"-she passed an arm round the girl-"we won't wait for those two disgracefully late creatures. F Perhaps I'm a bit superstitious. I don't like things put off." She led the way into the dining-room. "April is a nice month for weddings-and our garden is so delightful then," she added, somewhat irrelevantly in view of the fact that no outsiders, only their own near relatives, were to be invited to the function.CHAPTER IXWHICH TREATS OF WEDDING PRESENTS AND A GREY GOWNTHE spring 01 1913 was unusually lovely. There never had been such an April, Mr. Dobbs averred. "It's in honour of you and your wedding, Miss Elfie." It was a week before the wedding, arid Elfie was paying her P.P.C. call on Mr. and Mrs. Dobbs, who had just presented her with a wedding gift in the shape of a large, somewhat hard red velvet cushion. They had had great misgivings about presenting it to her in person. Mrs. Dobbs was of the opinion it should have been sent round to Cholmondeley Court with a card attached imprinted with their names. 'But,'' said she, "it would beAN UNDRESSED 11EiSOINL	161nice to see her face when she opened the parcel-so let's leave it a bit. Something may happen to tell us what to do."	And the ''something which did haqati ' had been Elfie's call, and Mrs. Dobbs, unable to resist its' delight of herself placing the precious parcel in the brhle-ilect's hands, had fetched it from a drawer in the ''best bedroom'' and beamed upon Elfie while she removed its covering.	I ant glad you like it,'' said Mrs. Dobbs presently. ''The consultations Mr. Dobbs and I have had, haven't we, Mr. I )obbs P 1 can't tell you. The number of visits I've paid of an evening to Bleach's in the Quadrant, and to \Ventworthi and IKillip's in George Street, you wouldn't believe. It's difficult in get anythink that's likely to last in these days, made of good niaterial same as we used to get when I was young, and 'andsome into the bargain. Everythink's so showy, the fish shop on the Hill makes me wonder what the world's cumin' to-1 say to perdition. And when I catclu'd sight of that cushion with its lovely colour under the electric light in Duckling's side window, and I went straight in and felt its quality, real velvet and both sides alike, none of your common sateen on the under-did you notice that, Miss Fife ?"-Mrs. Dobbs leaned forward and with reverent fingers called LIfe's attention to the underside of the cushion being an exact counterpart of the upper--save for the 'ummin' birds-I says to myself, 'This will do', and to the young man who served me, the dark, very superior young man, 'Do you guarantee this article will last for twenty years I "-FIfe started she hadn't envisaged the idea of having to live with a red velvet cushion for so long a period-"And his reply was, 'Thirty, madam-the way they call you Madam at Duckling's slio',vs what a very superior shop it is, and no shoutin' for 'sign' if they haven't got a ha'peth of ribbon the culuni you want.'' Mrs. Dobbs here called Mr. Dobbs's attention to the unpleasant fact that All, with In ad and long collarless neck extended from the shop door opposite like a p:'ering young giraffe, wass trainingly listening to tIn ir converatinn, and she requested her hnslenicl to remove lint. This done, she took up It(,)- story, after a pious hope that -Mi. Dobbs had not (unIt' cracked Alf's skull, as they'd no money for actions for damages. ''And when the cushion arrived I put it away in a drawer with a lavender bag against it. Smell it, Miss Elfie.'' Again the covering txqx'r st as removed, and Elfie sniffed at the cushion while the Dobl scs watched her with gratified eves ''A tid I il hope it will go with your drawering-rooni when von have one, for I bear von re going to travel at first in fnrrie parts. I should have a red rlrawering-roum if I was	a. l s F11-it', it's a cheerful colour, and husbands, most he ken, elteerhil if von it-ant to do am-think with them.'' Mr.F162	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEDobbs here intimated that he would like to get in a word. Tie wanted to know if the wedding was to be a quiet one no guests, nobody invited, as rumour had it. He looked anxious as he put the question.	"Yes," said Rifle, "but you are to come, you and Mrs. 1)obbs, and Mr. Winks, and Colonel Wyckham, and Bridget, and two or three of Mr. Brian's relations ; just our immediate friends. And now I must go. I am paying my P.P.C. calls, and I've still Mr. and Mrs. Winks."	"One moment, Miss RIfle," said Mr. Dobbs. "May I ask your opinion of this ?" He drew a scrap of paper from his waistcoat pocket. "Trade's been very bad again lately, we think it was the cold March we had ; fish, boiled fish, isn't heating, and the demand for cod has been nothink short of shockin'. Somethink had to be done; it gave me a headache last night worryin' at it-the portry, I mean-but I don't think it's bad. P'raps I'd better read it out to you, the writin's not very good, cos I was so tired with the effort." Impressively Mr. Dobbs intoned the following;"Here I am, a fresh young cod, Weighing five or six pounds odd. Close beside me you will see Shrimps for sauce to eat with me."	Elfie expressed her strong approval. "I think it's capital, Mr. Dobbs. Splendid. You're a real poet."	She laughed as she walked across the Green with the cushion under her arm; the Dohhses always did her good, they were so kindly, so simple, and so nice to her. She knew they were real friends. They admitted they were not doing well, yet what must they not have spent on their gift ? "And it shall live in my future drawing-room," she vowed, "but perhaps I might slip it into a muslin cover, and when the Dobbses come to see me Si it out."II	Three days before the wedding Hnmphry's present arrived -half a dozen plainly but beautifully bound books, all representative of Elfie's favourite poets. With them was a brief note:	My prognostication was, apparently,	wrong, though there arestill three days to run. I ought to say 1 00) glad because I loveyou enough to desire your happiness, but-well, human natureis a tough thing to knock u against, and the very devil to conquer.		Always yours,J-Iznaphry..\'		\['L-:-I	I!,	i	1L3	LU \LUS 1Cei1L o lien tlic IcirLel \L,i Iinigiit in by Si mid, and after examining the volumes asked if he might see tie note.	I suppose they're from Humphry, he's the only chap who bnows your keenness for Milton, I remember you used to spout him together when you were little more than a kid." Brian held out his hand for the note, already in the slightly possessive attitude of a husband, but Elfie, who was turning over the volumes and dipping, or pretending to dip, into the Sonnets" of Shakespeare, did not respond.'What does he say ; is he coming to the wedding 1''1 don't think so ; he's not been asked."	"But still, I should think he's sure to come. Why, old Humph's known you as long as I have, and he used to be jolly fond of you himself. Once I thought you were going to marry	him, that he was to be the lucky chap . 	Brian laugheda complacent sort of laugh that irritated Elfie, and his nextobservation did not tend to improve matters. "But a manlike Hnmphry doesn't know how to love ; hasn't got it in him-a morose, self-centred chap; and, what's more, I couldn'timagine any girl, any decent sort of a girl, getting keen on him.Could you ?" Apparently forgetting the note, he walked tothe window and flung it wide ; the clay was as warm as summer,and the garden was radiant with new, tender green, andfoaming blossom of cherry trees, the beds gay with wallflowers,daffodils, and hyacinths, and the lawn, freshly rolled and mown,sloped away to the sparkling river, a vivid stretch of emeraldloveliness.	"Could you?" lie repeated. "I like old Humphry, but he's a bit of a mole, and seems to get surlier every time I stumble across him. He'd make a queer sort of a lover, don't you think ?"	"Why ?" Elfie, while Brian had been busy with the window and his own conversation, had been quietly tearing the note into bits, and now dropped them into a waste-paper-basket.	"Why ?" she repeated, idly turning the pages of the ''Sonnets''. ''Why would he make a queer lover?"	"Because he wouldn't know how," laughed Brian; "he'd be too shy, too awkward, too stammery, and rough. He'd be lukewarm, too, the sort a girl dislikes, all milk and water; worship her from afar."	"I see," said Elfie. She recalled Humphry's impassioned love-making on the seat by the river. How little men understood one another Her lips curved in a smile ; and how dear and simple Brian was; talk of moles She crossed over to the window, her irritation had given way to a feeling of tender affection, in it was a quality almost of motherliness. She was like Mrs. lngli'hv. and, for the matter of that, all big-minded'64	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEwomen, in the way she loved "her man'; always the maternalquality was there, Men were so brave and fine and clever, but so simple, and they wanted such a lot of "taking care of". She laid a light, caressing hand on his shoulder, while the smile still hovered about her mouth.	He asked her what was amusing her; gallantly he lifted her fingers to his lips.	"I was only thinking how I shall always have to see that your boots are dry when we are married." she responded"My boots are dry!"She laughed.	"What a funny and-prosaic thought I J hope you are not going to he a fusser, Elfie; I couldn't stand that sort of thing." He allowed her hand to fall.	"But-I like the thought of looking after you, of taking care of you.''	"Horrors!" he cried. "I couldn't bear it. Don't you try that on me, dear girl. I'm not that sort; you ask the mater. I shall take care of my wife, she won't take care of me-you understand." Lightly he kissed her, and he did not see the look of lovely tenderness slowly fading from her eyes, nor the one that took its place of wistful inquiry, almost of half-fearful doubt.Humphry might be a mole, but he would have seen.III	The following evening Mr. and Mrs. Ingleby walked together in the garden, ostensibly to look at the hyacinths, which stood like a row of white spectres in the beds in front of the portico. in reality that Mrs. Ingleby might "work off steam".	Over her thin lace gown Mrs. Inglehy wore a soft chiffon wrap-the evening was wonderfully mild; in her hand she carried a stout walking-stick, a curious combination, it appeared to Mr. Ingleby, and mildly he asked her why.''To switch at things."	"Well, keep it away from the hyacinths, my dear; they are unusually fine this year, and a credit to Plunkett. Shall we walk towards the kitchen garden, where there may he weeds whose heads you might remove ?"	Mrs. Ingleby smiled and passed a hand through her husband's arm. "I am vexed," she volunteered.	"Obviously," he replied ; "and are your slippers strong enough for this peregrination ?"	She ignored the question-her slippers were, as a matter of precision, about as thick as a sheet of note-paper-and prancing, rather than walking, she accompanied him downAN		UND1L55E1)	IiE1UINJt	i6sthe ilight of steps to the little grassy place where lived the ancient sundial, the stone seat, and the gnarled apple tree. What a wealth of blossom the apple tree promised.	"Now," said he, "what is the trouble ?" He took out his watch. "We have exactly seven minutes to dinner. By the way, have the young people gone ?"	"I don't know." Mrs. Ingleby sat down with such vehemence on the seat that Mr. Ingleby wondered she had not hurt herself.	"And you sound as though you don't care," he said, seating himself beside her."I don't. I'm tired of them.""Tired of them !" he ejaculated."Sick of them."	"My dear, and they will be leaving us so soon!" Mr. Ingleby was mildly reproachful.	"Will they? That is the point. Will they be leaving us so soon	Mr. Ingleby turned and looked at his wife. "I was under the impression they were to be married the day after tomorrow."	"H'm I" said Mrs. Ingleby. She lunged out at an inoffensive dead daffodil with her stick, and removed the head of a handsome tulip.	"I wish you would explain," said Mr. Ingleby, a little plaintively. "You talk in enigmas, you are ruining the flowers, and I want my dinner."	"Ten minutes ago Brian came to my room and suggested I should go and inform Elfie he did not approve of her appear:nce-neither of her dress nor mode of doing her hair; and would she be kind enough to alter both before accompanying him to Rosamond's party tonight.""Good gracious I" ejaculated Mr. Ingleby.Mrs. Ingleby continued her switching."And did you comply ?"I told him he could do his own dirty work."'Was not that a little strong 1' suggested Mr. Ingleby.	Did you ever request your mother to make me acquainted with the unpleasant fact that my persona! appearance offended V011 17 eyes ?'''1 shouldn't have dared.'Mrs. Ingleby laughed, then she relapsed into gravity.	;hvyn, I am troubled," she said. "He hurts her a dozen hues a day, and this is before marriage.'	"Would a girl be very hurt at her lover not liking her gown md telling her so ? I ask from ignorance.""It would depend upon how he told her. To depute such a	tIn irr to iris mother would he in the	4 f'Ossi I ic' to te160	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE"Yes, I can see that. Did you point this out to him ?"	"I did. I said : 'Brian, if you don't approve of RIfle's gown you must tell her so yourself ; but remember, she has cast her mourning to please you she is going to this party to please you ; she has taken immense pains over this frock to please you ; and if you wish to cut her to the quick, go yourself and tell her she looks a frumpy dowd.'"But he didn't say that ?"	"He did lie used those exact words to me. 'In that mousecoloured thing she wore last night she looked a frumpy dowd,' lie said 'and as my future wife I want her to look her very best at Rosamood's, where most of our Richmond friends will be,'"Well, isn't that rather natural ?" queried Mr. Ingleby,we do like our women-folk to look nice when we love them.'' "Yes," said Mrs. Inglehy "but there is a love that is blind, and Elfie is worthy of such love and there is a love that, even when it is not blind, cannot wound. Besides, Brian has only to wait a little while. When they are married he can dress her as he likes. RIfle will not mind, so long as he is content. She has no gift for clothes, no sense of clothes, and he knew this when he asked her to marry him. She possesses many rare and lovely attributes she has a beautiful face and mind, is clever, bright and full of humour, hut-is not smart-odious word! Pah ! And because she does not deck herself out like a bird-of-paradise Brian fumes and frets, as though she were to be on exhibition a prize pig at a show. My metaphor may be mixed, but 1 know what I mean, and I did all in my power to make him see that his suggestion was, not to wrap it tip, that of a cad.""And did he ?"	"Not a bit of it. Man-like, hat-like, mole-like, that can't see its own nose in front of its face-	'My dear," remonstrated Mr. liiglehy, ''you sound like Jennings, or-er----I\lrs. Dobbs.''	'I only wish I'd their power of invective, and liberty to use it !" retorted Mrs Ingleby. "I'm tired of wrapping things up. I've been wrapping things up for Brian and Rifle's sakes for months. For months I've been wanting to tell RIfle she must show more spirit, more independence, where Brian's concerned. Her whole attitude, since her engagement, has been one of plastic submission to his every whim and fancy, and it's not good for a man. She, who used to he all flame. I cannot believe she's the same creature. She so adores Brian, her one desire in life is to make him happy, so she gives in to him on every debatable point. He calls it her sweet reasonableness. I call it a plumping herself upon the floor for him to trample upon. It would serve him right if she broke off theAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	167engagement. Yes"-at her husband's look of dismay-"now, at the very last minute. lie's our son, Elwyn, and I love himwe love our children, in spite of their faults. I have desired this marriage greatly"-Mrs. Ingleby got up, and her eyes rested upon a faint golden streak in the western sky-"God knows how greatly. I used to think if any girl could bring out all that is fine in our boy's character it would be Elfiebut I'm beginning to doubt it. Brian needs a selfish wife, a domineering wife Elfie does not stand up to him enough, and-she is too good for him."	Picking up her skirts, while still brandishing the walkingstick, Mrs. Ingleby swept up the steps as rapidly as their twistiness would permit. Tears were in her eyes, and she did not wish her husband to perceive them. He saw that she was greatly distressed, and lie followed her with his own heart full of trouble and impending disaster. He had never known her roused and incensed without cause she was a just as well as a singularly tolerant woman.	At the portico steps before entering the house (,Stroud, with reproachful mien at their unpunctuality, was sounding the gong a second time), Mrs. Ingleby turned and confronted her husband. "Do you think," she asked, with tremulous lips, "that I am the only woman in the world who has considered a girl to be too good for her son"Possibly."	"Yet, I may be wrong. He is straight and kind and good at bottom, isn't he ?" There was a wistful, a pleading, note in Mrs. Ingleby's voice."My dear, he is your son," replied Mr Ingleby. Raisingher hand to his lips, he kissed it.Iv	Meanwhile, a little scene which would have been comic but for the underlying tragedy of it was being enacted upstairs on the first landing of Cholmondeley Court. Brian, in immaculate white shirt, perfectly pressed trousers, silk socks, and hair as satin-smooth and shining as a couple of hard brushes and brilliantine combined could make it, stood gently knocking at Elfie's door He was dressed, but for his coat, and a very fine, clean, and well-groomed Englishman he looked, and his whole distinguished appearance would have brought pride and pleasure to any mother's or fiance's heart. He was not a danrlv, but he took extreme pride in the clothing of his well-proportioned person dress did not irk him as it irks so many men. He never lost his temper over bows flat refused to tie, missing studs, or shirt-fronts that becameiflS	AN UNDRESSED HEROINElimp through passionate handling, because none of these minor (lisagreeahles ever occurred in his life. He took care that they shouldn't.	Iii response to the knock Elfie opened the door a couple of inches. 'I'm not quite ready," she announced on seeing who it was, 'the dinner isn't till a quarter to eight, Brian.""1 know," he replied, but he lingered.	"What is it ?" she inquired. "Can I do anything for you Tie gone wrong ?"	He replied in the negative, and the idea of Elfie assisting him with his bow tickled his fancy. 'I-I was only wondering what you were going to wear tonight."	"Wear!" Hike opened the door another inch, and he caught sight of a scrap of delicate white lingerie.	"Yes. What sort of a dress. This dinner and dance, you know, are being given in our honour."	'I know, so I'm wearing the grey. You don't like me in black, and I don't see any harm in beginning one of my trousseau frocks before the time. But I thought I told you."	"Yes, but--he fumbled at the handle of the door"you don't mean the one you wore last night ?"	"I do; I thought I would see how it looked before venturing upon it tonight. It was rather a shame, as we were alone.That frock, Brian, cost three pounds ten," she said impressively, "and is one of Madame Elise's choicest creations. I've never spent so much on a dress in my life."There was silence."Don't you like it ?"	"Not very much, dear. Haven't you anything else in your trousseau ?"	"Nothing nicer." There was a slightly ominous note in HIke's voice which a man of finer perception would have at once detected, but it was lost upon Brian and he blundered on.	"Well, I should wear your black one-on the whole it suits you better, You don't mind my suggesting it, dear? I want you to look your best tonight."	She brushed his semi-apology to one side. "What's the matter with the grey ?""It's dowdy."	"Dowdy!" There was a moment's pause, then she shut Lhe door firmly in his face.	Brian descended the stairs, after completing his dressing, a little perturbed but in no way alarmed. He was sorry if he had offended her, he had not meant to, he had said more than he intended when lie went to her door, but he had spoken out of kindness and for her own sake. She could not be aware of the appearance she presented to the world inAN UNDRESSED HEROiNE	169tne grey with its long loose draperies, when such short tight skirts were at the moment en regle. To Mrs. Ingleby, Rifle, in the little somewhat stiff bodice with its white net fichu had appeared quaint and refined and charming, though rather out of date ; to Brian she had been merely 'dowdy".	He hung about the ball, waiting for her to descend. He allowed Stroud, with his deliberate bishop-like movements, to help him into his light overcoat and hand him his hat. lie tapped a barometer and glanced at an evening paper. Outside, the big Rolls-Royce, waiting to convey them to the Arkwrights', purred gently.	Mr. and Mrs. ingleby, entering the hall from the portico, inquired for Elfie. "You'll be late," said Mrs. Ingleby.	I know. I can't imagine what she can be doing,' said Brian."Is she going ?""What do you mean"Did you say to her what you requested me to say?'"Certainly: there was no harm. Elfie's too sensible."	"Sensible! You mean she overlooks your being a fool. I've no patience. You've no more idea of the sensitiveness of a young girl's heart than a cow has. But-" She broke off. Stroud at the dining-room, with sphinx-like face, was assuming deafness of an impenetrable degree, as a well-bred servant should, but she knew that he heard. Pishing and pshawing, she rang a bell violently and requested Jennings to ascend and see what Miss Charrington was doing. A moment later RIfle appeared, and with head held high. Her cheeks were flushed as she ran down the stairs, and in her eyes was a queer little flash that her father used to describe as her "danger signal". She apologized for being late, without looking at Brian, kissed Mrs. Ingleby good night, and passed out of the front door without another word	Silence reigned in the car as they sped swiftly along, and when Brian attempted to take her band she gently repulsed him. "I don't feel like that tonight.""Why not? Are you vexed with me	Her impulse was to say "No". She wanted to appear indifferent to him, indeed she longed to feel indifferent, so great was her hurt, but her innate honesty pre('ented her from telling an untruth. "Yes,'' she said."Because I said I did not like your dress ?""No""That's not true."	'It is absolutely true. It is not because you do not like lily dress, but the manner in which you informed me of this uisolating fact. There are ways and ways of offering unisiJatable information to people we love or are supposed to170	AN UNDRESSED HEROINElove-one way hurts, and the other doesn't. You chose the former."	'I am sorry,'' he said, but his tone and manner belied his words, he felt slightly irritated, lie thought she was making a great fuss about nothing. Some girls, lie knew, were exacting and unreasonable when engaged, but RIfle had always been so different and sensible and had demanded so little.	"I shouldn't mind if you'd said you didn't like a suit of mine."	"You might," she said slowly, if that particular suit had been worn entirely to please me, if, for my sake, you'd cast a token of mourning for"-she paused while she steadied her voice-"for someone you'd greatly loved."	He was touched. "I'd forgotten that. I'm awfully sorrybelieve me, RIfle. I'd forgotten you were renouncing your black to please me." Again he tried to take her hand, and this time he was not repulsed, but it lay in his own very cold and unresponsive. He bent and kissed her. "Will you forgive me, dear? I'm sorry I hurt you, but I can't help not liking everything you wear it's most unfortunate."	"It is indeed," she responded, and the dryness of her tone more surprised than offended Brian, but he had no time to dwell upon it, for the car had drawn up at the Arkwrights' door.CHAPTER XELFIE'S EYES ARE OPENEDTHEY were over : the dinner, the dance that followed it, and-the engagement.	It was two o'clock in the morning. Brian was asleep. He was worried, a little unhappy and slightly ashamed at what had occurred, but his worry, shame, and unhappiness had not prevented him from falling sound asleep within a very short time of his getting into bed. His last conscious effort had been that tlnngs would conic right when Elfie had slept upon it. Dear old RIfle. She was too fond of him to allow' such a trifle to be the cause of a final rupture between them. For, after all, it was a trifle. Just a few carelessly uttered words to Itosamond which RIfle, who had been sitting out a dance alone in a fern), corner of the conservatory, hidden from view in its green depths, had overheard. It was unfortunate, but there it was it couldn't be helped. TonightAN		UNDRESSED HEROINE	171she was irreconcilable, implacable, but she was tired, overwrought, poor darling. But tomorrow . . . All would be well. He hoped she wasn't lying crying her eyes out, he hated to think of her being so unhappy when they were to be married within forty-eight hours-and about such a very small matter too. She was so sensitive-poor dear little Elfie, bless her tender heart He turned on his side and slept the sleep of a healthily tired young man.	He might have been a little surprised, if not considerably shocked, could his entity have left his unconscious body and marched into Elfie's room, for it would have discovered her packing quickly, methodically, and with no trace of emotion or "sobbing herself to sleep" visible in her person.	Outside her door Mrs. Ingleby stood listening in breathless amazement at the sounds from within. She had come from her bed alter much debating and hesitation (Brian had been to her room to tell her of the quarrel, and of Elfie's obstinately adhered-to determination to end the engagement, though he himself didn't believe it, and he was sure he and his mother jointly would be able to get round her), to comfort the girl I Instead of the sobs she had expected to hear, the sound of opening and shutting of drawers, rustling of paper, creaking of leather trunks-obviously a packing was proceeding-fell upon her surprised ears.	She tapped at the door, and in response to Elfie's prompt "Come in" she entered.	Elfie, clad in a pale blue flannel dressing-gown, and with her curly hair tumbling about her shoulders, was engaged in stuffing a pair of stockings into a boot.	Mrs. Ingleby sank into a chair, and-a most unusual experience with her-speech was momentarily in abeyance. while she simply sat and stared.''I'm packing,'' said the girl, a little unnecessarily.Mrs. Tngieby nodded.	Elfie tucked the stuffed boot in a corner 01 the trunk and started on the folding of some pretty dainty underclothing, part of her trousseau. Fascinated, Mrs. Inglehy eat and watched her. It seemed to the elder woman that these happenings were but the phantasmagoria of her brain. Presently she inquired the reason for such strenuousness when there was all tomorrow."I'm leaving early in the morning."	"You are not being married till two o'clock the lollowing afternoon," said Mrs. Ingleby doggedly.	"I'm not being married at all." Elfie was deadly white, but she retained her composed front. She tucked a large hag of lavender among some nightgowns and placed them in the trunk. "Hasn't Brian told you ?"172	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"He has, but neither he nor I believe you. We-1 cannot believe you, at this hour when-when your marriage is almost tin fail accompli. It is incredible. It would be cruel to-"'Not to him," interrupted Elfie. "that I cannot believe"'Well, to me."	'Would you wish me to marry a man who does not love me, even if he is your son, for your sake ?"	"No," said Mrs. Ingleby. A little shiver ran through her frame and a bleak look settled upon her countenance which brought to Elfie a sense of the keenness of her suffering. Forgetting her own misery, she impulsively crossed the room in a desire to be of some comfort and make things easier for the mother of the man they both really loved. Kneeling in front of her, she cried : "Don't look like that. He will not mind, for, you see, he does not really care for me. He will be a little shocked at first, his pride will be hurt, chiefly because people will know and talk, but he will soon forget it, and so will they; people in these days have no time to dwell upon anything for long, they are always hurrying on to something else, to some new sensation or excitement. It will be the subject of a nine days' discussion, then forgotten.""And you and me What about us	"We, too, will learn to forget. It will take a little longer, that is all.""Perhaps you do not care."	"Care I ' At the blanched, stricken look which slowly crept into the girl's face, ageing and withering its fresh loveliness as though seared by a hot iron, Mrs. Ingleby would have given much to recall her words; and putting her arms about her, she begged for forgiveness."Of course," said Elfie.	For a moment or two they sat thus, their hearts beating one against the other, each of them fighting her tears.	"Can you tell me," inquired Mrs. Ingleby presently, "exactly what happened? Do you mind ?" With gentle fingers she smoothed RIfle's disorderly hair.	"No, I don't mind. I should like you to know. And don't think it is just because of tonight I have made this decision, it is a culmination of things. For weeks, months, in fact, always, I have been doubtful in my own mind about Brian.	Whether he really cared for me as I want to be cared for. Humphry, in the beginning, told me he didn't; but I refused to he1ieve him, I closed my ears to his words oJ warning. A thousand and one little things cropped up between us, only straws, infinitely light and small, perhaps, but they showed me which way the wind blew, yet I closed my eyes, shutting them tightly, refusing to see. My love for Brian wasAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	173greater than my pride. Then there was the postponement ot our wedding-he feared the Italian cold for me, I, who can wcathei the most rigorous English winter . . . . Marriage in the abstract was more attractive than marriage in the concrete." Elfie gave an ironic little laugh, and Mrs. Ingleby shuddered at its bitterness but at once it was superseded by a half-pitying and almost tender smile that crept to the girl's lips. "Poor Brian," she murmured, "he could not help it. I am not blaming him. He thought he loved me because he pitied me, and he liked me as a friend, and he found out he wanted me as a friend only and not as a wife. It is not his fault, and it is just as well we both discovered his mistake in time, it would have been dreadful had it been discovered afterwards.""But you contemplated marrying him up till tonight."	"But tonight clinched things. My partly-opened eyes became fully open, I regained my balance. When a man discusses his fiance with another girl, and dances most of the evening, and flirts openly and unashamedly with the other girl while the fiance sits alone and neglected, it is quite time, I think, for the neglected one to send the man about his business.""He discussed you ! With whom ?'	"Rosamond, of course. Couldn't you guess ? He's always admired Rosamond. And she did look superb tonight," added Elfie generously. "She was in gold tissue which clung to her figure, revealing her splendid proportions--l would rather have died than wear it, I should have felt almost naked, but I suppose I'm prudish and stupid. Anyhow, everybody seemed to admire her prodigiously. Then, she wore gold shoes and stockings, and with her golden hair she looked like a magnificent golden lily. You should have seen her in a tango with Brian--	"I thought you were supposed to dance the tango better than any girl in Richmond," interrupted Mrs. Ingleby jealously. "I have seen you dance it, it seemed to me like the movement of water in moonlight.''	"But remember I was wearing a 'dowdy grey frock', in which probably I looked like a dull mouse," said RIfle lightly. "I watched them for some time men had not asked me to dance, or very few-they concluded, I suppose, that I was engaged most of the evening to Brian. They, Brian and Rosamond, did not see me, they were too busy with their steps and looking into each other's eyes. After a while I went to the conservatory, I wanted to get to some cool place alone. Mv head was throbbing and at my heart was wild sickening jealousy. I got behind an immense palm and pressed my forehead against one of its wide cool leaves. I was wonderingI7.;	z\ N	UNDRESSL1) HEROiNEwhat I should do. Tonight, i never is. lure, it iiöul been brought home to me that Brian did not really love me. Then Humphry appeared; he most have caught a glimpse of my gown among the leaves, for lie found me. He said he had seen me enter the conservatory and had come to look for me. He fetched me a more comfortable chair, pushed it right back into a recess behind the palms, and got me a cushion and a footstool. 'You're not well,' he said, in his abrupt way. I replied I was only tired. This sent him off for a glass of champagne, and when he returned with it he drew up another chair and talked about all sorts of small impersonal matters that didn't require answers, while I drank the wine."	"Humphry is clever," interrupted Mrs. Ingleby, but the nice([ of praise was given in a grudging voice"He was not clever tonight, only kind."''In which lay his cleverness, Well-.---. I""He chatted on and seemed in unusually good spirits-"	"Perhaps he saw what was coming. If Brian does not love you, Humphry does.""I know," agreed Elfie simply.Mrs. Ingleby, in wisdom of despair, made no further comment.	"The music in the distance slowed and died down, the tango was over, and Brian brought Rosamond to the conservatory, to a seat not far from where Humphry and 1 were seated, and suddenly my own name fell upon my ears across the intervening space. Rosamond said how tired and off colour I looked, and was anything the matter with me, and before I could let them know I was there she went on to say that she didn't like me in grey, it wasn't my colour, and couldn't Brian acquaint me with the fact, and he replied that he had, and I had greatly resented it, and then he actually asked her if she couldn't give me a few hints about my clothes. 'It's too late to help her with her trousseau,' lie said. 'I'm afraid her frocks are bought and packed: tonight's is a specimen. But when we return-you have such splendid taste, and Elfie is so dear and sweet she won't resent it if you are tactful, and her one great desire seems to be always to please me.' " RIfle paused and loosened her dressing-gown at her throat as though it stifled her, and pushed back the hair from her forehead. She wandered to the window, arid opening it wide, leant out into the cool, sweet night. The white hyacinths below gleamed spectre-like in the luminous darkness, and their fragrance ascended and stole refreshingly into the overcharged room. Leaning there, so slim and young, with tier wealth of hair lying about her white neck, and with her nymph-like air, she might have been Arid poised ready for flight. Mrs. Ingleby dully wondered how her son could help worshipping the girl.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	175	F		And then 1' she asked at length. She did not move from		her chair and join Elfie at the window-for the first time in		her life Mrs. Ingleby felt old and very tired.			"I got up. Humphry laid a restraining hand upon me,		but I shook it off. I was just trembling with passion, but I		kept quiet, and I knew and realized every word I uttered.		I walked to them slowly. 'I heard what you said, I couldn't		help it. You spoke before I had time to acquaint you with my		near neighbourhood, and I am glad. You have saved me from		many things. You have asked Rosamond to help me in the		choice of my clothes, Brian, when we are married. There will		be no occasion to trespass on Rosamond's kindness, for-there		will be no marriage.' I got out of the conservatory somehow.		Brian hurried after me, but I ignored his expostulations and		incoherent apologies and took the arm Humphry offered, for		my legs were shaking beneath me. I made my excuses to		Mrs. Arkwright. Brian had telephoned for the car, and he		brought me home. He had the sense to say very little. He		does not believe I am in earnest. It seems strange"-Elfie		left the window and returned to her packing-' 'that considering		he has known me nearly all my life lie understands me no		more than does this boot-tree." She set her lips in a grim little		smile as she pressed the tree home into a boot.			"And where are you going ?" Mrs. Ingleby knew that it		was hopeless to plead, to argue. She understood Elfie if		Brian did not.			"To Colonel Wyckham. I know he will take me in while			look for a situation. I shall go to him the first thing in		the morning-perhaps you will allow me to breakfast in my		room ? I shall not see Brian again-there is nothing to be		said, and an interview will only be painful to both. I intend		writing to Mrs. Fish to inquire if she is suited with a house-		keeper-companion. From what I saw of her I am of the		opinion few girls would have the strength to remain in her		employ for a longer period than six months. She may he		advertising and sitting in registry offices now for all I know		at any rate, I can write. I rather liked her, and I think she		liked me as well as she could like anything that isn't golf or		bridge."			Elfie closed the lid of the trunk and started on a hat-box.			"Need you finish all this tonight 1'			"I want to get tired."			"You mean to make you sleep ?"			Elfie nodded.			"Are you-very unhappy ?"			'I have loved Brian since I was six."			"Oh I" cried Mrs. Ingleby-the exclamation, fill of poignant		suffering, seemed to he wrung from her---and to think he is176	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEmy son. You are unhappy, but your unhappiness contains no shame. 1 am both unhappy and ashamed." She got up and moved about the room, touching the ornaments and Elfie's toilet accessories with restless, nervous fingers. "I would almost have preferred his being a drunkard or a thief, but this, this is so small. It hardly seems possible, when he knows you so intimately, your brain, your heart, your soul	that lie can bother about such trifles as the cut of a gown and the angle 01 a hat.''	I suppose some men do," said Elfie philosophically, "they can't help it, they are built that way. Look at the girls who marry, and the girls who are single. The Rosamond type always marries."	"But they don't hold the men; a man requires character, a companion after marriage. Rosamond is as empty as a vacuum flask.""Men don't look ahead.""Men want slapping," said Mrs. Ingleby, suddenly vicious,and yet how we like them-we can't help it, can we ? Theftvery weaknesses, at any rate to mothers, are lovable. We feel they need our help and sympathy and pity. I-" and now the despondent note left her voice, and, drawing herself up, she became the strong, invincible woman once again, with brave eyes and resolute mouth. "I am not going to lose hope of Brian arriving some day at finer and better things. I shall do all in my power to help him. If I lose faith in my son, who will believe in him ? I am afraid you will never forgive him, never marry him. I cannot expect you to, but try not to hate and despise him too much."	"Hate him! My curse is that I still love him," cried RIfle passionatly, getting up from her knees from the hat-box and confronting Mrs. Ingleby. "I love him, I love him. If only I could hate him, there might be a chance of happiness for me, but as it is-" She broke off, wrestling with her emotion, but the floodgates were open, tears gushed to her eyes and streamed down her cheeks, her whole frame was shaken with heavy sobs.	"Oh, don't, my dear, my dear, my little Rifle, my daughter that was to be !" entreated Mrs. Ingleby. Opening her arms she took the girl to her heart, and together they mingled their tears.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	177Boox IIIELFIE AND HER WORKCHAPTER IELFIE ENTERS THE FAMILY OF FISHFOUR days later Elfin, in the 2.10 express from Waterloo, was on her way to Loamgate.	Mrs. Fish had sent a rapturous reply to her inquiry. "Come at once. Just what I'm looking for. Absolutely providential. Expect you tomorrow." This by telegram.	Colonel Wyckham had smiled at its phrasing, and remarked that the lady sounded excitable, and that with all the hundreds of young women in the world there must be one who could have filled the situation at a moment's notice, and it seemed hard that Elfie should be wrested from him.	He loved having the girl. She had told him her trouble briefly and without any moaning or sell-pity. He was old and frail and must not be put to a moment's unhappiness on her account, and after that she had resumed, with what struggle to herself he never knew (for the perceptions of the old are not quick), her usual bright manner, and entertained him in her own original way.	J arvis had deeply resented her coming, "Springing herself upon two defenceless men," as he put it, and had left her trunks lying in the hall for hours with the excuse that they \vere too heavy for him to handle alone, that he suffered Irom an internal complaint not to be mentioned before a young lady, and, until the bread-man came, who was obliging, they must remain there.	The hread-man came and went, so did the milkman. Nothing happened, and Elfie, who wanted a frock for the evening, and her brush and comb and slippers, unpacked the trunk in the hall, while Jarvis, from the foot of the basement stairs, listened to her movements. "She can just keep on (ling that," he grinned, "I'm not going to carry up her beastly luggage. Once settled in 'ere we shall never get her out again. I know the ways of females, sneakin' and clingin' like leeches. \Vimmen are all the same. And when she gets tired of runnin' up and down with her things-her nightgown, and toothbrush, and ribbons, and hats-she'll begin to178	AN UNDRESSED HEROINErealize, ii sties any gumption, she's not wanted.'' But that same evening saw a very subdued if inwardly enraged Jarvis. Elfie, who realized that the old Colonel was fretting about the trunks still lying about in the hall 'Looked so inhospitable," he muttered, suddenly put on her hat and went forth	ii search of somebody who might he glad to earn a shilling over a simple job. When she encountered Mr. Winks climbing up the bridge steps from the river she cried, "Providence has provided you, Mr. Winks," and stating what she wanted asked him if he would come.	"Of course, I'll come, Miss Elfie I suppose that swine of a J arvis refuses ?''"He says he's got an internal complaint."	Mr. Winks laughed satirically. "His internal complaint is a lying and black-blooded heart."Elfie jumped a little at the strength of the expression.	"He'll be impudent to you, I'm afraid," she said when they arrived at the house.	"He'd better, I'll give him what for." And Mr. Winks was as good as his word. In a brace of shakes he and Jarvis were carrying the trunk up the stairs and Jarvis walked first (which was undoubtedly the heaviest part of the job), while Elfie followed them with encouraging remarks. If a look could have killed, she would certainly have been stretched dead on the landing, so malignant was the glance Jarvis bestowed upon her, but she remained quite alive and well.	When she saw Mr. Winks out at the front door and thanked him for his assistance he ventured to put into words a question that had been burning upon his lips What was she doing here, if he might make so bold to ask, when she was to be married the following day. Briefly Elfie explained. She went very white, but her eyes and lips were steady."You're not going to be married to Mr. Brian ?'"No," she replied.	Mr. Winks stood as one stunned for a moment, then lifting his peaked cap, and with a "Good evening, Miss Elfie," he walked down Ormond Road, and was swallowed up in the bustling crowds of the Hill."What a gentleman!" thought HIde, as she closed the door.	No one met her at Loamgate Station, but a cab was waiting to convey her to "Top o' the Hill".	It was a lovely April day, and notwithstanding the misery at her heart and the benumbed feeling in her brain, just as though nothing ever again could affect her vitally, Elfie wasAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	179able to derive some pleasure from the blossom which, like a white mist, veiled the orchards, and to allow her eyes to rest with satisfaction and gratitude on the happy nodding spring flowers which filled the gardens.	"This can never be taken from me," she thought, "the spring and the beauty of the world. Father has gone, Brian has gone, but spring has been left to me. Every twelve months this miracle will occur, and I shall be able to enjoy it, unless even my sight is snatched away." Elfie, because she was young, knew that she could never be happy again ; had she been old, or even middle-aged, she would have looked ahead to "other things" that would help to fill her life, but her very youthfulness made her despair. She meant to be brave, to do her best, to work hard, to throw herself into the interests of others, but for herself-well, her life was finished.	She had not seen Brian again, though he had sent her a letter of strong entreaty to give him an interview, however brief. He had called at Ormond Road, but she had refused to see him; lie had not been up when she crept away that morning after an early breakfast in her room, and she had not replied to his letter. She had finished now and for all time with Brian Ingleby, and as she drove through the scattered village of Loamgate and along the budding green lanes she resolutely refused to think of him.	"I'm going to work," she said, "for the family of Fish. I'm not keen on it. I hate strangers, but as I've got to live I might as well work for the Fishes as anybody else ; and there is, at least, one thing in their favour-they live on the top of a hill."	But they did not. It was a grievous disappointment to her when only two-thirds of the way up a road which resolved itself into nothing more than a slight incline the carriage stopped in front of some blatantly new gates which the driver got down from his seat to open, and they proceeded along a gritty and obviously new carriage drive to a large modern, staring red-brick house, guarded on either side of the front door by two very clean and neat white lions.	"This can't he 'Top o' the Hill' !" said Elfie to the driver, who, opening the carriage door, awaited her descent.	As the words left her lips the white-painted, gorgeously be-knockered front door opened and Mrs. Fish flung herself through it. She stopped, upon seeing Elfie, with the suddenness of a car when the brake is violently applied, and then shot on again. "I'm so sorry," she cried, with a backward movement of her head and a wave of an arm, "that I can't stop to speak to you, but I'm due at bridge at three-fifteen, and I'm already late. I'm awfully glad to see you"-this at the top of her voice. "Mavis will look after you. The dinner18Cc	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEis all arranged"-she was hurrying along the thive. "OhShe stopped dead. 'I've forgotten the sauce. But of course you can order it. What a relief that you've come. Don't forget, tell Cook sauce must be made." She tore on again.''Wait,'' Elfie shrieked 'what sort of sauce ?''"Oh, you must decide that-that's what you're here for.'	''But," Rifle chased after her, ''what is it for : fish, meat, or pudding ?''	"All three,'' cried Mrs. Fish, in headlong flight. "Oh, dear, don't keep me, I shall be so late, and they'll all be so angry." She opened the high gates, with a clang the)' fell together behind her, and RIfle returned to the house laughing-yes, actually laughing.III	A tall, pretty girl with a languid air and tired voice received her in the hall.	"I am Mavis," she announced, "and when you are not engaged in trying to run this impossible house you are supposed to companion me. I hope you won't find me very disagreeable, but you won't have time to tire of me, because you'll be gone." She smiled pleasantly"Gone !" echoed Elfie."Yes, when the housekeepers are not coming, they aregoing."	"Really !" said RIfle. Her trunks had been carried upstairs by the driver, and Mavis was now leading the way to the room she was to occupy.	''It is near to mine. When you wish to be alone you must keep it lucked, because the children have a habit of bursting in. You would like to unpack, I expect. I hope Mother has not filled any of the drawers or the wardrobe as soon as a housekeeper leaves Mother brings her overflow things here. Yes, she has.'' Unceremoniously and with small regard for Mrs. Fish's befeatlmered hats, ruffles, and gowns, Mavis bundled them all together and bore them away. "When you ore ready,'' she said, returning, "I will show you the house and garden and introduce you to Cook, and we will have an arty tea, that is to say if Baiuhridge can be persuaded to a ar himself from his latest Jack London in the pantry. B:c tobridge is passionately fund of reading it's a little incunvel, ''ut at times, but Mother says the servants must have plenty ul leisure to amuse themselves in order to keep them happy. They are not happy, because they are constantly giving notice.Good-bye for the present. I shall be in the drawing-room whenyou've finished."AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	ISI	Rifle, while she unpacked, found herself smiling more than once. "I believe I shall be happier here than 1 imagined," she thought.Her introduction to Cook was deferred till after tea.	"You will require strength," pronounced Mavis as she poured out the tea; "please help yourself to some crumpet.""Why strength ?" inquired Elfie."Cook, to put it mildly, has not pleasant manners.'"Not another JarvLs," cried RIfle.Mavis looked at her, and she explained.	"She's not quite like that. She's not actually so rude with her tongue, but she makes you feel she is unaware of your presence. You might be a small fly that has accidentally fallen into a jug of milk.""Oh, dear I" Elfie's spirits drooped.	"I will help you; I mean I will stand by you during your first interview. Housekeepers to whom I don't take a fancy I leave to their fate."Elfie acknowledged the implied compliment.	"You look young for this sort of thing. I thought you were going to be married 1'"I was.""And you're not ?"	"No." Elfie coloured painfully. "I wonder if you'd be kind enough to tell me what my duties are to be," she said hurriedly.	"With pleasure." Mavis was sorry she had put such an embarrassing question. She had conceived a great liking for Rifle; beneath a languid and somewhat indifferent manner beat a very kindly heart. Brought up properly she would have developed into a very charming girl, but she had been left much to herself, had never been to school, and had received no sort of moral or gentle training from her mother. It was a marvel that she was as nice as she was,	"First of all," she began, while handing Rifle some richlooking cake, "you mustn't worry about anything: dirt, or untidiness, or unpunctuality. Don't attempt to make drastic alterations, we're used to muddling along, and Mother doesn't mind anything so long as she gets her games, and we all get tnough to eat, and don't quarrel and have nice smiling faces when she comes in. I saw you glance at the dust on the piano. Now, you mustn't. You must wink at it if you wish to he a successful housekeeper. Mother says far too much fuss is made about a little harmless dust, that people work themselves up into such a nervous state of exhaustion over its removal that they have no strength left to enjoy life. Of course, she'd prefer it not being there when she happens to notice it, and she's quite pleased when we get a vigorous, thorough housemaid;182	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEbut vigorous, thorough housemaids don't stay, the establishnient is too irregular. There are twelve meals a day to be ordered by you-""Good heavens I" Elfie put down her cake in consternation.	Mavis smiled. "It sounds worse than it is. You do it nominally, Cook in reality when the housekeeper is frightened of her, which she mostly is. I'll tell you the things nobody likes Miss Scrapps, the last housekeeper, ordered suet pudding for the schoolroom dinner and 'J.'od burst into tears-"Elfie got up. "I'm sorry I unpacked," she said.	Mavis laughed outright. "Don't be a goose. Tod easily ci ics"But who is Tod ?"	Mavis explained the family, which was large, astonishingly large, in these days of few and far-between children. "Mother never meant to have so many, but she's careless about most things," said her eldest daughter calmly. There were three brothers away at Oxford, Eton, and Marlborough. "Mother would have liked Bob and Billy to be together at Eton, but they fight so terribly, real bleeding noses and bunged-up eyes," explained Mavis graphically, "though they are really quite fond of each other." (Elfie thought it was a queer way of displaying affection.) After this, there had been a gap of five years and then a quite prolific period with three children in three and a half years, two girls and a boy, aged respectively nine, eight, and five and a half. "Tod is the baby, and he's rather wicked, but quite nice when you know him." The girls' names were Robin and Wren, because they had resembled two bright birds when they were babies, with sharp brown eyes that saw and understood everything.	"And the meals ?" inquired RIfle, when the family was finished ; they were weighing heavily upon her heart. ''How can there he twelve ?"	"Four dining-room, four schoolroom, four kitchen. They are not much varied-Mother never notices, and Father daren't speak. Father's habits are regular : he reads family prayers, walks twice round the garden, catches the 8.45 up to town, returns by the .5o, and in the interval makes pills-a horrid business, but profitable.""What kind of pills ?'' Elfie ventured.	'Welcome pills for weak, wan, white women,' ' reeled off Mavis. "Have you ever heard of anything more desolatingly awful ? When I see them scattered about the fields and lanes--"Scattered about the fields and lanes The pills ?"	"I mean the pill advertisements, of course. I suddcni' catch sight of: 'Weak, wan, white women', on a staring yellow board, in a lovely meadow covered with daisies andAN UNDRESSED HEROINE 	183buttercups, and I go quite sick and angry. Now shall we goto Cook, then we might have a walk. Keep your head up anddon't appear alarmed.	Elfie felt like a Christian martyr entering an arena full of lions.	Cook gave Elfie a shock of surprise. Elfie had conceited her a large, formidable person, encompassed with much superfluous fat and clad in a print gown, surmounted by an enveloping white-bibbed apron, the bibbed part starting immediately from beneath her chin like the rounded crest of a hill. Instead of which she discovered a small spare woman with eyes like hoot buttons, a month a rat-trap could have given points to in annabilit v and geniality of expression, and a chest as flat as a slate wInch hung against the dresser. She was garbed in neat uncompromising black alpaca with a white lace jabot at her throat, and was seated on a hard wooden chair reading Voles for Women.	She rose as the two girls entered the kitchen, not from any sense of politeness, Elfie saw, but in indignant protest. No one but the servants was allowed to enter her kitchen after ten o'clock of a morning.	Mavis got in first, before she, Cook, could gather herself together, with a pleasant "Oh, Cook, I've brought Miss Cliarrington to see you. Miss Charrington has taken Miss Scrapps' place.'' Elfie murmured a polite ''Good afternoon," to which Cook paid no heed. "Tomorrow," she said, "would have been soon enough to make Miss Charriugton's acquaintance. No one comes to my kitchen in an afternoon, unless on special business." She stared at a geranium as she spoke, and Elfin felt exactly like Mavis's fly in a milk-jug, but she held her ground. She had the message to deliver about the sauces, and that she felt was sufficient excuse for her presence. She gave it-it was a simple message and a most reasonable request; but when Cook repeated after her, "Sauces for dinner I" these simple homely words to Elfin's strained ears sounded like "Sauces for hell I" and she'd much ado to keep herself from bolting out of the kitchen.	Mavis strolled to the window and spoke to a grey parrot with a propensity to bite, She was endeavouring to restrain her laughter at Elfie's expression.	'Il'linl sauces for dinner ?'' The words rattled against the tympanuuii of lilies ears like hard peas in a pod.	"1 don't know. Mrs. Fish merely wished me to request you to make three sauces for dinner, for the fish, meat, and184	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEsweet. I cannot make any suggestion as to the composition of the sauces until I know with what they are to be eaten."	'I don't want you to; they are already mixed. You and I will begin our work tomorrow, Miss."	The speech was insolent, but in a sense was offered more politely than Cook's speeches were usually offered to the new "chits of housekeepers", and the "Miss" was a concession, if Elfie had only kno.vn it; but she did not know it, and when she retreated from the kitchen, followed by Mavis, she announced her immediate intention to repack her trunk and leave.	"Cook has been more civil to you than I've ever heard her to a new housekeeper," pronounced Mavis comfortingly.	"J)oes she, then, usually throw frying-pans at their heads 1'Mavis was consumed with laughter."Why does Mrs. Fish keep her ?"	"Because she's a good cook, economical, and never uses more than five pounds of butter a week. Butter Is one of Mother's economies, perhaps because she eats so little herself for fea of stoutness. If Cook were to use six pounds she would be discharged at once.""I wish she'd use it," said Elfie mournfully.CHAPTER HIN WHICH ELFIE ARRIVES AT A STATE OF PEACEFULNEUTRALITY WITH COOKELFIn, to her own surprise, slept remarkably well, She had expected to lie awake half the night thinking of Brian and her wrecked life, worrying about Cook and her new duties, yearning unutterably for her father and her old beloved home, yet no sooner had her head touched the pillow than she was off into a sleep dreamless and profound. That is where youth, in its trouble, scores over age-it sleeps, and recuperates, and gradually finds new life.	A maid woke her by drawing up the blinds, and requetcd her, if she wanted a bath, to go to the upper landing bathroom, next to the nursery, as Mrs. Fish was occupying the lower one.	Arrived there, Elfie encountered a small girl who appc;red to be all black ribbon bow, standing in the doorway, andAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	185who, to Line's greeting, made no response beyond staring at her curiously with round black eyes.	"Are you Robin or Wren ?" Elfie inquired, as she advanced to the taps and turned on the water.	The child refused information. "I'm glad you don't wear a red dressing-gown like Miss Sewapps'," she volunteered ; "it didn't suit her. I like yours better; mine is pink.""Is it ?" said Elfie.	Are you going to stay a long time ?" The little girl, who was holding a large unattractive-looking doll by its leg, suddenly jerked its head uppermost and cradled it in her arm."I don't know; perhaps I shan't be wanted.""No, I don't expecks you will. Cook choked last night."	At this startling announcement Elfie was shocked, but inconceivably cheered. A choked cook was much less formidable than one who was unchoked. Still, she felt bound to express a sorrow she did not feel.	"She's not dead," said the little girl; "it was only a herring hone, and Bainbridge smacked her on the back. A crust of bread got it up--I mean down."	"I see." RIfle's sense of elation passed. 'I'm afraid I shall have to ask you to go, or I shall be late; my bath is ready.""You needn't mind me.""But I do, Robin."''I'm not Robin.''"Well, whoever you are. Please be quick."	The child backed slowly, with her eyes steadfastly fixed on Elfie's face. She tripped on the mat and fell, banging her head on the floor; a piercing howl rent the air. She was very little hurt, and no tears came; but she wanted attention, and not slights, from this new, pretty, bluedressing-gowned lady.Elfie picked her up and rubbed the sore place soothingly.	"After breakfast," she said, "we'll steal a piece of raw meat from Cook and lay it on the place." A shuffling noise sounded in a distant corridor, caused by the heavy rustle of a skirt which manifestly was of some unyielding material and by feet which slithered and did not lift themselves properly from the ground ; these belonged to Frulein, the children's governess, who with peculiar and guttural sounds bore down upon the little girl, seized her, and carried her iway to an accompaniment of shrieking expostulations. LIfie, congratulating herself that she was immune from such sweeping Teutonic onslaughts, hastily took her bath.	She reached the library door as the second gong for prayers boomed through the house, and she entered shyly. The servants were already assembled on a row of leather chairs186	AN UNOItE5SE1) HEROINEwith leatliern expressions on their countenances. They regarded this desire for daily prayers on their Master's part as an out-of-date mild form of lunacy, and very interrupt lul to their duties. Cook reminded Elfie of a new poker, not of brass, but steel. Mavis lounged in an easy chair, one slim brown-stoekinged ankle twined round the other. Mr. Fish, with all open Bible before him, was seated at a gate table, the numerous legs of which seemed to get entangled with his own. He had been absent from dinner the night before, a business engagement having detained him in town, so had not seen Elfie, but he took no notice of her entrance now, not from discourtesy, but from a sense that new acquaintances should not be made across the pages of an open Bible. Mavis had once introduced a Frulein Braun, whose name she had pronounced not as Brown, but brawn, when he had been engaged upon a preliminary reading of the second chapter of Lamentations hi ore rendering it to the family, and ever since then he had associated the chapter w'ith "pig", which seemed to him neither right nor reverent. He was a small, thin man, with thin sandy hair brushed in parallel streaks across a round bald patch on the top of his head. His eyebrows were sandy and shaggy, and beneath them were mild, kind blue eyes, a blotchy nose, and an indeterminate mouth and chin. He looked what he was, weak in character, a bit of a dreamer, easy-tempered, and the possessor of a high moral but narrow code. The one inspiration of his life had been "Welcome pills for weak, wan, white women" and the only occasion upon which he asserted himself was at family prayers, at which he insisted every member of his household, save the small children, should he present, and woe to those who absented themselves.	He now awaited Mrs. Fish, inwardly with impatience, outwardly with softly moving lips as lie ran through the appointed chapter for the day. Each morning he awaited Mrs. Fish thus.	When she did arrive it was as though a Swiss avalanche had of a sudden descended upon a peaceful unofieniling village, and everybody sat up with a jerk.She said brightly she knew she was late, but she was surtalways were, so what was one to do ? She nodded bvainmglye he clocks and her watch bracelet werc wrong, and theyto everybody and plumped herself into an arm-chair alter lifting higher than old-fashioned people would have ii' eined nice or modest her tight skirt, and thus revealing a ginirous display of bright blue-stnckiugcd legs and ankles fortunatuly they were shapely, and equally fortunately Bainhridge kept his eyes discreetly on the floor.Elfie, from Mr. Fish's appearance, was prepared for anAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	187attenuated weak little voice, and she nearly fell off her chair with surprise at the volume of sound which, like the blast from a trumpet, suddenly fell upon her ears. He was indeed fulfilling to the letter the command of the prophet Isaiah, from whom he read "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." Here he paused and frowningly bent his gaze upon Mrs. Fish, whose many dangling charms from a curb bracelet she wore were making interrupting little noises, owing to her surreptitinusly manicuring her nails. Silence obtained he resumed his reading. As the final words fell upon the silence of the room he closed the Book, made a lung dramatic pause, and then suddenly shouted, "Let us pray."	To her dying day, Elfie never forgot how, without any preliminary preparation for what was coming during an earnest and impassioned extempore prayer, Mr. Fish dragged in Cook. It was hard on Cook, but not so hard as on those members of his household whose risibility was not perfectly under control. "And, dear Lord, while thanking Thee for removing a fish-bone from Cook's throat through the instrumentality of Thy servant Bainbridge, teach her in future to eat with greater care and less speed, for fish-bones are tricky things, and on another occasion a crust of bread or Bainbridge	may not be so handy 	He stopped dead, for from theneighbourhood of Elfie's chair came a queer, choking soundjust as though a fish-bone had surprisingly (seeing her face wasburied in its morocco depths) lodged in her gullet, and every eyewas turned upon her. She struggled and wrestled, driving hernails into her own flesh, and holding her breath till she was well-nigh asphyxiated, and then, just as she was regaining control,if Mr. Fish did not solemnly go and pray for the Stranger	within his gate, which was the last straw .		Human laughterhas but a limit to its powers of suppression. Elfie rose from herknees with contorted features, and, avoiding Mr. Fish's re-proachful eye, bolted from the room.	She was sorry to have so misbehaved herself, for she had conceived a strong liking for little Mr. Fish.11	Her heart was in her mouth as she entered the dining. room a little later and took her place at the breakfast-table, but she was, to her surprise, received with perfect friend]; indifference. The Fishes were far too engaged with theit !ttcrs, newspapers, golf engagements, and breakfast tc give a thought to a lieu' housekeeper, even though she had	z8s		AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	given way to laughter at an inconvenient and undesirable	moment.		Mr. Fish, half buried behind the Daily Telegraph, was	silently and painfully (to please Mrs. Fish, who thought it	would do him good) eating "Force". Mrs. Fish was enjoyinga substantial helping of bacon and eggs while studying her	engagement book, which she had propped against a toast-	rack. Mavis was playing with a sardine she was not a	strong girl, and was a small eater. Bainbridge attended to	Elfie's wants, and silence reigned for a while.		Then Mrs. Fish inquired of Elfie what she was going to do.		"How do you mean ?" Elfie had been expecting to he told	what to do.		"After you've performed your duties ?'		"I don't know."		"The lawn has been marked for the first time this year.	Do you play tennis? Mavis loves a game, don't you, darling?"		"No," said Mavis.		Mrs. Fish did not appear to hear her daughter's negative.	She was fumbling in a silver chain-bag, from which she	presently drew in triumph a small red note-book. "This is	for you," addressing Elfie. "I give one to each of my house-	kepers-they're so helpful." She handed it to Elfie across	some potted meat.			"You will see I have briefly dotted down	your duties for the day, with an approximate time for each.	If you will open it at the first page you will find, '9.z5 : Feed	the gold-fish. 9.30			Clean out parrot's and love-birds'	':	cages.' They're such darlings, the love-birds, and so friendly	I think they'll soon learn to like you. They're wanting to make	a nest, so you might give them half an empty cocoanut. '9.45	Interview Cook'-the tradespeople don't come till ten for	orders, so that you've plenty of time. '10.15---'		"Am I to be with Cook a whole half-hour ?" There was	dismay in Elfie's voice, and Mavis choked into her tea.	Observing Mr. Fish make a sudden movement behind his	paper Elfie wondered if he were offering up a prayer for his	daughter's safety.				S		"You will require it' replied Mrs. Fish, disregarding Mavis'	breach of good manners time was passing. She was due on	the links in an hour, and she had several notes to write before	starting.		Incautiously she swallowed some freshly poured out	tea and scalded herself. "There are twelve meals a day to	think out and arrange with Cook, they take time, though they	are quite simple when you get into them. Mavis doesn't eat	parsnips, and cucumber doesn't agree with Mr. Fish, does it,	Hammy ? Tod is a little fanciful, but he's not a strong child.	He's devoted to pork pie, but don't give it to him more thantwice n week. Then, of course, they're particular in theAN UNDRESSED	HEROINE	[39kitchen; Bainbridge is fond of halibut. Oh, I forgot you were there, Bainbridge, but you do like halibut, don't you? And Annette, my maid, adores curried prawns. There is one thing I bar from the servants or anybody else-spring onions." Mrs. Fish, who was folding up her table napkin, became impressive. "Not a spring onion is allowed to enter this house. Frulein hankers after them, but no-one spring onion, and there would be no more Frulein. And now I must go or I shall be late for my appointment. Good-bye all." She threw the table a bright look and bustled out.III	Elfie made a disheartening start; the parrot bit her, its cage for cleansing purposes had been carried from the kitchen to the conservatory; and when she had bound up her finger and inquired of Bainbridgc where she could procure an empty cocoanut for the love-birds (from Mrs. Fish's airy reference to cocoanuts there might have been trees of them all over the place), he replied they didn't need it, as they were both males.	"Oh V she said, backing precipitately from the pantry, and, taking herself and her hot cheeks up to her bedroom, she once again decided she couldn't stay. She did not yet realize what a blessing in disguise this strange mnage was to be to her. Here it was already 9.35, and only once had she found time to give Brian a passing thought, and her spirits, considering the imminence of her interview with Cook, were not unduly east down. She was frightened of Cook, but she was net a coward, and meant to put up a bit of a fight before she was worsted, and she sat down by the open window, which looked on to an excessively new-made garden, and a pleasant stretch of pine-clad and undulating country beyond; and thought out a plan of campaign. "It might answer," she decided at length, 'where an ordinary 'eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth' wouldn't, and may not have been tried before. I can but put it to the test."	Punctually at a quarter to ten she entered the kitchen with a calm front, an unwavering eye, and great inward trepidation. She greeted Cook pleasantly. Cook, seated by the window, was chopping parsley, and she remained seated. Undaunted, Elfie procured another chair, carried it to the window, and took up a position exactly opposite to her.	"Cook," she began in a pleasant conversational manner, "I want to talk to you for a moment before we start on the meals, may I? I won't keep you long, and-please continue your chopping, I can shout above you."Ji	.\ N	U N I) R I. N S U U	ii it U I' I N N	Si surpnsed wis Cook at this that she desisted with the chopper arrested in mid-air.	"Now I want you to help me," continued Elfie earnestly. "Will you 1'"Fleip you ?"	'Yes; I have my living to make the same as you. Neither of us, I'm sure, would he working if we had anybody to work for us, but as we haven't, I'm sure you will agree with me the more harmoniously we work together, the more pleasantly our livings will be made.''	Unused to such a form of attack, Cook, for a brief moment, sat bereft of speech, then, gathering herself together, she dashed into the fray with an elan and all the impetuosity of a born fighter.	"You're here in my kitchen to discuss meals, I believe, not to"-she searched about in her memory for something from Voles for Wornen-"to waste my time with hethieal propositions." She had not a glimmering of the meaning of the last, and hoped that Elfie hadn't.	Elfie's lips twitched. "I know," she replied, "but I wanted, if possible, to clear the ground first.""Vhat ground ?""The ground of our relationship with one another.'"There'll be none."	"There must be," contradicted Elfic gently, "if we are to meet each morning for something like the space of half an hour."	"It'll be more than that today unless we get to business," said Cook with sudden fierceness.	"Ah, well," murmured Elfie with a sigh. She produced a sheet of paper and a pencil from her pocket and wrote: "Dining-room Luncheon." Then, pausing, she tapped her teeth reflectively with the pencil and asked "Have you taken a great dislike to me, Cook ?""Dislike ?""Yes,""Not specially.""Well, wouldn't it be wise to try and make the best of me"I don't know what you mean.""I'll explain. From what I can gather, Mrs. Fish intendsalways to have someone to act as housekeeper as she, herself, 11is so much engaged." 	-"She does. It's a maggot she's got into her head, and Ic't knock itout of her. I could manage much better alwie."an Cook got up, and with violence flung coals on to the fire.	"I'm sure you could," Elfie agreed heartily; "the dinner last night was excellent, though, if you'll pardon me, not very original. But I expect that is the fault of the family. EnglishAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	19!people are conservative in their tastes. Give them eggs and bacon, roast beef, potatoes cooked one way, and the aroma of perpetual cabbage water pervading the house, and they are satisfied.''	Cook picked up the lid of the stockpot and returned itgently. She was unaccustomed to talk of this description from chits of housekeepers, and she was becoming interested in spite of her fixed resolve not to be. It was a libel about cabbage water as far as she was concerned, and she said so, and as for potatoes one way, in this house they was never served two ways alike, as everybody in the family could testify. The parrot here (it had returned to the kitchen) set up a shrill shriek-of corroboration, not derision, for it liked Cook, who gave it succulent tit-bits, the combative instincts of each having, apparently, served to draw them together.	Rifle, feeling it was a distinct gain that Cook would stoop so much as to parley with her, continued: "I am, as I say, perfectly aware of my superfluousness, and that I am not needed by you; but as Mrs. Fish has-how did you put it ?got this maggot into her head and she insists upon a housekeeper, don't you agree with me I might just as well be that housekeeper as anybody else ? I have to earn my bread. I'm alone in the world; and I mean to stay here, whether you make things difficult or easy for me." She spoke with a disarming little smile, and her eyes were bent upon her sheet of notepaper. The sun, streaming through the window, glinted upon her pretty hair, and revealed at the same time the transparency of her skin, and the whiteness of her cheeks. She looked delicately fragile, and Cook's eyes, alert as a hen's, noted the engraved signet ring she wore (it had been her father's), and that she was in black.	Something strange stirred in the hard, board-like region that contained Cook's heart. It was not exactly a sensation of pity-it was more a suspension if not actually a cessation of the animus she had entertained towards Elfie when she had entered the kitchen. The novelty of it almost alarmed her. She hoped she was not getting "soft". She never had been "got round" by anybody, and she wasn't going to begin at her time of life. She braced herself for fresh effort, but again she was disarmed by Elfie's next words: "So as I don't want to leave, indeed hope to be here for a long time to come if I'm fortunate enough to satisfy Mrs. Fish, don't you think we might as well try to work together amicably ? One of my duties is to come to the kitchen each morning. Believe me," Elfie looked at her frankly, "I don't want to be here, I'd far rathL'r the menus were left to you alone, but as I have to be, you might try to make the best of me, as I will try to make the best of you What do von think ?''1y2	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	Cook felt the ground was slipping from beneath her feet. She had never been argued with before, never been talked to by any former housekeeper in this quiet, judicial, yet perfectly polite manner. They, the former housekeepers, had lost their tempers and either shouted or wept when she had goaded them beyond endurance. She perceived that Elfie would never do any of these things. She would continue to smile, in all probability, just as she was smiling now, not sarcastically, or nastily, not propitiatingly or toad vingly, hut- Suddenly, Cook thought of a picture she had once seen of two pugilists shaking hands at the end of a fight, and the unwonted sensation at her heart she as suddenly discovered to be admiration, admiration for a doughty foe.	"So that is all," concluded Elfie. "I have tried to make my position clear to you, and I want to know which it is to be-war or peace ?"	There was silence for a space, save for the ticking of a clock on the mantelslielf and the uneasy stirring of the vicious parrot, then Cook, rallying her forces, delivered herself of the following: "Neither, as far as I'm concerned. I'm not gointo fight you and make things too hard for you, neither amgoing to be too sweet and slobber over you, it's not my way. But I'm willing to talk the meals over with you of a morning without quarrelling, and if you've any suggestions to make I'll take them if they're good. I can't say more'n that."	"Thank you," said Elfie gravely. A moment later they were deep in the projected meals for the day. Elfie made one or two quite good and novel suggestions which cook accepted without argument, and later in the day she passed the observation to Bainbridgc that she'd known people shape worse at the job of catering than Miss Charrington. "Probably used to nothing better than red herrings or sausages-and-mashed for her own dinner, but she's got idees, I will say that for her, and" -to herself--she's a bit of a plucked 'un, too."CHAPTER IIISUDDEN APPEARANCE OF HUMPHREY AT A TEA-PARTYAs the mouths passed, Mrs. Fish actually began to put on airsat her "discovery" of Miss Charrington, so great was Elfie'spopularity with the family. She seemed to "fit in", Mrs.Fish remarked, just as the umbrella stand fitted into theAN UNDaEssEn HEROINE	193	recess in the hail, and it was difficult to imagine how they hadc, er dune without her.	She was always ''there'' for one thing,winch was such a pleasant attribute.	Miss Scrapps never hadbeen 'there''	if you wanted her in the drawing-room she	was at the top Of the house, or the end of the garden, or if you	wanted her in the garden just to keep an eye on Blake when he	was putting or the bedding-not plants, and mixing op scarlet,	pink, and yellow with a reckless disregard for any colourscheme, she had gone to the post or was washing her hair,	But	RIfle seemed to possess the faculty of being in two places at the	same moment, and every member of the family came to relyupon her.	It was not, as a matter of fact, that she was much cleverer than the former housekeepers had been, but that she threw herself more whole-heartedly into the interests of the Fishes. She had no interests of her Own, now that her life had been swept bare, so why net theirs ? Arid the feeling that she was useful and of some help to others brought a sensation almost akin to happiness to her own starved heart. She asked for no holidays. When the family migrated to the sea for July and August she migrated with them, arid shrimped with the children, bathed and walked with the elder ones, separated Billy and Bob in the goriest of their fights, metered with Mavis and Claud, the eldest son, who was down for the long vacation from Oxford, but firmly refused to flirt with him. Then, she listened to a daily recital of Mrs. Fish's ups and downs at golf, the downs caused by univatered greens and preposterously high sand bunkers, arid to Mr. Fish's remarks on the decadence of religion in the life of the Nation.	She remained in touch with Richmond through long, kind, delightful letters from Mrs. ingleby, arid an occasional brief one from Flnnrphry, but she never went there, and she knew nothing of Brian beyond the fact that he was again abroad travelling. To the Debbses she wrote regularly, enclosing every now and again belplrd little poems she also wrote to Colonel \Vyckbam and Bridget cheerfully, an(] with amusing accounts of her work. Both Mrs. Iriglehy and the Colonel pressed her to visit them, if only for a week-end, but she always refused. Richmond she felt as yet not strong enough to face. She must wait till feeling was still more shad within her and her craving for her old dear happy life with her lather less piercingly keen. She had begun to he aware that a day would conic when the sharp edge of her suffering would have passed. It would always be there-her loss of her father arid Brian-this blank she knew could never be filled, but as time passed she would get more used to things. Arid ''geti in- used to things'' was what she most look forw'rosl to in a calm and philosophical, contented spirit, asking for no more ol this C194	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEworld. Elfle little realized that with her temperament she could no more become calm and philosophical at the age of twenty-two than could a young fox with the hounds alter it in full cry. As surely would she come to seek and possibly find happiness as the fox would make for earth.	October had now arrived, with its clear-washed skies and days of calm sunshine. The pine-clad hcathery country about Loamgate had lost its purple radiance, and the great stretches of bracken were fading and beginning to crumple up, but the lanes were carpeted with delicious red and yellow leaves, damp and sweet-scented, and the hedgerows were a veritable tangle of riotous beauty. The larches, against the pure blue of the sky, were as feathery tassels of amber, and the birches, with their white slender trunks, and thinning canopies of delicate golden leaves, looked like streaks of pale flame dotted about amongst the sombre firs and pine trees.	On an afternoon of unusual brilliance-there had been frost in the night and early morning-Elfic had gone with the children to Bogshott Woods, a couple of stations away, to gather chestnuts. Mr. Fish, from a window, seeing them depart-it was a Saturday-had been suddenly filled with a desire to go, too-on his own-and look at the trees and bracken and hedgerows of which Elfie had spoken in such glowing terms. Perhaps there were things in the world worth seeing which had, up to now, escaped his notice. He was a dull little man, and he knew he was dull, and he wanted to cease being dull. On most Saturday afternoons he walked about his garden and peeped into his conservatory and potting shed and frames, and admired his neat beds of flowers and wished the lions at his front door did not appear to he following his every movement with their staring but quite mild eyes. Today, however, he was tired of his garden it was dull and ordioarv-just like himself-he thought, with unwonted depression, the sparkling fine white gravel walks hurt his eyes, and the tall sunflowers struck him as being meretricious and offensive. Beneath his neat check waistcoat stirred a neverbefore-felt desire for a wood, a big cathedral sort of wood with old solemn trees and quiet noises, with the soft thud of fircones on leaves and pine needles, the stir of the wind among larch( s, the plaintive sudden note of a wood-pigeon, the gentle hoppings and pickings of unseen little creatures. He could scarcely have put this desire into words, for lie was a singularly inarticulate little man, but he did know lie craved for something fine and primitive, something that had not been bought and paid for with money, and he believed a wood would answer his purpose. He envisaged tea alone in his large, handsome, and uuhomely drawing-room-his wife and Mavis were out-with thin sandwiches of "gentlemen's relish" and Fuller's eocoanutAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	195cake, which he hated, and which dropped all over the carpet. It seemed to him that for years he'd been eating "gentlemen's relish" sandwiches and Fuller's cocoanut cake on his Saturdays, and his very soul this afternoon revolted from them.	"I shall go to Bogshott Woods, too," he cried with sudden wild daring. He placed a cap on his head, wished he was wearing knickerbockers knickerbockers would have been more in keeping with pine-woods than striped grey and black town trousers and have looked touristy-and took a stout walking-stick from the umbrella stand which he hoped lent to his appearance an out-of-doors country gentleman aspect.	He started at a brisk pace down the drive, feeling quite adventurous, and at the gate met a young man coming in. He was a stranger to Mr. Fish, and the little man firmly decided he should remain so, though he was obviously coming to call. Politeness forced Mr. Fish to hold the gate open for the stranger's entrance, but he did not speak, and with eyes on the ground and head averted he allowed the gate to close behind him, and started down the road in the direction of the station. A voice arrested his steps, however, before he had gone a dozen paces "Pardon me, but can you tell me if a Miss Charrington lives at this house 1"'She does." Mr. Fish turned his head but an inch.'Do you know if she's in 1''She isn't.""Oh !" There was disappointment in the stranger's voice.	"And she won't be for some time," said Mr. Fish a little vindictively. The stranger -was causing him to miss his train to Bogshott, and there would not be another for over an hour.	"Do you happen to know where she has gone ?" the strange young man inquired next; lie had opened the gate and had	followed Mr. Fish down the hill.		"Yes to Bogshott Woods."		"Is that far ?"		"A couple of stations away."		"Do you know what time there's a train ?"		''I do,'' cried Mr. Fish savagely; "in ten minutes.	1 wason my way to catch it when you began all these questions.If you'll follow me we may yet he in time." With a suddensprint Mr. Fish was away, and Humphry Doyle, for it was he,after him. Mr. Fish's grey and black striped trousers positivelyflashed down the lull, and could his co-directors and the stafiof "Welcome Pills for Weak, Wan, White Women" have seenhim they would have nearly fainted from amazement.	The train was in when they reached the station, and Mt. Fish, who was well known to the station-master and ticketcollector, was permitted to hop into the nearest compartment without a ticket and without protest. But not so Humphry196	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEthe station-master and ticket-collector fell upon hun literally with strong assault as the train began to move, and but for Mr. Fish's intervention and a yell that he was a friend of his and he-Mr. Fish-would be responsible for his fare, Humphry would have been pulled out by the zealous officials.	"Thank you,' said I-fumphry, when they had both regained their breath "That was very decent of you, sir."	Mr. Fish said nothing. He was already regretting his action and wondering why he had been such an infernal ass as to saddle himself with this unknown young man for possibly the whole afternoon, for there was a determined appearance about Humphry-Mr. Fish did not like the dogged look of mouth and jaw but Huniphry's next words reassured him, and he could see a prospect of having the wood, at any rate a part of it, to himself. ''When we arrive at Bogshott I will harass you with my company no further if you could just give me an idea of where 1 am likely to find Miss Charrington-or perhaps you are joining her yourself ?"	"Oh no," replied Mr. Fish quickly. "I'm on my own. I'm going for a walk quite by myself. I expect you will find her near the Silver Pond at the extreme end of the first wood. She's with the children-my children, and I heard them say they would have tea there-boil their kettle. They've gone to gather chestnuts." Mr. Fish was becoming more friendly disposed towards Humphry now that he was assured the young man had no limpet-like intentions.	"Miss Charrington is an old friend of mine," Humphry felt called upon to explain, "and I thought 1 would run down for an hour or two to see her."	"She is a very charming girl," Mr. Fish observed, "and I never met a nicer." Afterwards, on reflection, he was surprised at the warmth of this tribute to Elfie. He was coming out in a new vein he did not know' himself in this reckless mood, and he had serious misgivings as to whether illness was not portending.	"She is," agreed Huinphry. "Is she-does she appear to be pretty well and cheerful ?"	"Both," said Mr. Fish ; "and here we are. Our ways lie together till we reach the entrance to the Woods, then we part."	They traversed the distance in silence. 'I shall be glad," said Mr. Fish, when lie said good-bye, "if you will return to dinner with Miss Charrington. I know Mrs. Fish will be delighted. Miss Charrington's friends are ours." Handsomely now he was atoning for his first inhospitality.	"Thank you," said Humphry. "You are very kind, but may I leave my acceptance open ? It will depend on-Miss Charrington."AN UNDRESSED HEROIN L	197II	Elfie was seated in a little sunny clearing close to the reed-fringed edge of the pool. Around her the three children were clustered. Frulein, sojue distance away, was immersed in a book. She disliked picnics, and she disliked still more tea out of doors. It was one of those wholly incomprehensible fancies of English people which left her to wonder how, as a Nation, they had ever become great. For herself, give her a firm table and a steady pot, unwobbling cups for tea, and plates full of sweet cakes, stable and reliable, and not given to a sudden sliding downhill or to infestment by foraging Insects.	Humphry, from behind a screen of some high blackberry bushes, watched the little scene for some moments.	Elfie knelt in front of the kettle, and with carefully applied fir-cones was making a most successful fire for its boiling. The children looked on rapturously, their hands full of fresh fuel for when it was needed. The cloth was laid and was decorated with glowing-tinted autumn leaves; and fading yellow bracken, twisted into the semblance of plates, supported sugary buns and jam sandwiches.	Humphry's memory leapt the years to the night when he had watched Elfie's dance on Bracken Slope in Richmond Park. What a happy elf she had been I And now her laugh rang out cheerfully, but to his keen preeipienee it contained a different note. And her face ! She was just as sweet and lovely, he told himself, lovelier, perhaps, but now there was a something else, a look of melancholy . . . or was it experience? Perhaps it was both. The most careless of observers looking into Elfie's face would have found there (almost with a shock of pain) an expression in her eyes and mouth rarely to be found in the faces of the young.Humphry's heart contracted as he watched her. Was she	till fretting after Brian ? Black jealousy had him in its grip. But she could not be; Brian was not worth it, he had treated her vilely.	He came from his hiding-place, and walked with his long, loping stride towards the little group. Elfie was visibly	tartled, and a flag of scarlet flew to her cheeks as she rose from her kneeling position and greeted him.	'Humphry I" she cried. "You! What are you doing here 1'	"I came to look for you. Mr. Fish told me you were here; I went to the house first. Can you come away with me, Kifie ?"19S	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE'Come avav ? Where ?"	'I mean to tea. I noticed a place near to the entrance to the Woods, a cottage, and it looked clean and nice."	Elfie considered. The children were staring at him with wide, round eyes of disapproval. They objected to Miss Charrington being snatched from them by this abrupt stranger, and Wren said so in unqualified language."She can't go ; the kettle's just boiling, and we want her."	"So do I, and you can always have her, and I can't. I'm only here for a little while," argued Humphry with a smile. He liked children, especially small girls.¥ "They will be so disappointed if I miss the tea-party," said Elfie hesitatingly. She saw something in Hnmphry's eyes, bent upon her, that warned her not to he alone with him.	He ignored the prospective disappointment of the children. "Do come," he urged, "I've so much to say to, and hear from you, Elfie; it's such ages since we met.""It's not six months," said she."It's been a lifetime," he retorted firmlyStill she hesitated.	"You will not refuse me when I've come all the way from London.""You can have tea with us here."	"I don't want to have tea with you here," he said violently; "and won't."	She yielded, smiling at his anger. The same old Humphry, she thought. Somehow she would keep him at arm's length, and at least he would tell her the news of Richmond.	Frulein summoned-a blinking, curious and astonished Frulein (so this Miss Charrington had a young man, a lover, and had never said a word about him)-Elfle went away with Humphry, or to be more correct, followed him along a narrow path to the cottage. He apologized for preceding her and at a speed that left her breathless."Is it going to escape ?" she queried at length"'What ?" he asked."The cottage."	He laughed, and moderated his pace. "I'm sorry, but I want to get there. I've so much to say, to ask you, RIfle."'And can none of it be said here ?"	"This path is too narrow for two, and the undergrowth at either side too dense and prickly for me to tackle with impunity, so I should either have to talk to your back or you to mine."	"Perhaps I should prefer it," she remarked a trifle flippantly, just because she was nervous.	Humphry made no response; he was a very thorough person when in earnest.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	199UT	And he started on his second proposal of marriage almost before the woman who had brought the tea to a small and pretty garden at the back, was out of earshot. He talked vehemently and hurriedly, just as though he had again to sprint for a departing train, and he brushed aside her lowvoiced appeals to him to desist,	"I can't and won't, Elfie. I'm at breaking point. God knows how I've got through these six months without coming to you before this. You've ended with Brian-you cannot care for him now or you wouldn't have broken with himwould you ? So I felt perhaps niy chance had come. You were free you were perhaps unhappy: you were with strangers ; you might not this time send me away if I were to come and again ask you to be my wife"-he was leaning towards her with his dark eyes riveted on her face, for the sight of which he had been hungering so frightfully-' 'but T waited for what I thought would he a decent time to elapse, though why one should consider the sham decencies of life in this conventional rotten age I cannot imagine. But there it is. Woman or Society has arranged certain idiotic conventions, and man, like a fool, conforms to them. Had I followed out my desire, my impulse, I should have come to you the very day after you broke with Brian. Would your feelings have been very outraged and shocked, Elfie ?"	She nodded. His strength and passion took her breath away. Yet, after Brian's lukewarm love-making, it was as balm to her tired and humiliated heart. This man, at least, cared for her. She did not return his affection, she told herself she could never love Humphry, but-almost she wished she could.	"You would have been shocked ? I guessed so, and I'm glad I kept away, but now at the end of these six years-""Months," she corrected.	"Years," he repeated. "Elfie, you have never been in love with yourself, so you are unable to imagine the length of time one day away from you seems to a man--" he smiled at her whimsically. "Why, I don't know how I've got through the infernal weeks . . . . My one thought, sleeping and waking, has been of you. Do you remember asking me that evening in Wardrobe Court if I'd ever done a single kind action for any living being in my life ?""Yes," she replied.	"Well, I hadn't then, and I admitted it; but I have since. I've performed three; they were the very deuce, but I worried through them for your sake." He paused while the200	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEimport of his words percolated into her mind. He could not have announced the gaining of a D.S.O. with a greater assumption of pride.	She checked the smile that rose to her lips, also an untoward inclination to pat his hand. Never had she known Humphry so engaging-he was like a dear simple boy."What were they ?" she asked.	'1 took my aunt to the theatre one night. I hooked seats. Neither of us enjoyed it, and she grumbled at the crowded train going home. Still, I did it."	'It was very nice of you, and I expect she really appreciated it. What else ?"	"I sent a man I knew, who was in consumption and hard up, to the sea for a month. It was wasted, for he died there."	Elfie laughed outright at the gloom on his face: then she straightened her features. "Possibly you made the dying for him much easier," she said gently. "He might have had to pass away in sordid surroundings amid bricks and mortar. I Can conceive that one's failing eyes might rest more happily upon little tumbling waves than upon chimney pots. Can't you ?""Perhaps.""And the third ?""Are you really interested ?""Deeply."	"Here I was really had. I gave the woman who cleans out my room half-a-sovereign because she whined and said she was in debt and had nothing left to pawn. She was drunk for the next two days. But-with all this we're wasting time. Elfie, aren't you going to be kind tome?"	"You mean you are not getting enough tea; let me fill up your cup." She took it from him with an unsteady hand."I mean you have not given me an answer to my question.""I did, Humphry; nearly a year ago.""But people change." I haven't.""And is it just the same 1¡'"Just the same.""No hope for meShe shook her head."And there never will be ?""I'm afraid not, Humphry. I'm sorry."	Bitterness, disappointment swept across his face, and for a moment he turned away while he fought for the mastery of himself. Then he said quietly: "I know you can't help it, Elfie, but I shall never give up hope."	"It's a waste of time." She pronounced the words gently but with decision. She wanted him to understand.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE		201	'That s my affair," he retorted. He got up, called for the bill, and in silence conducted her hack to the Woods. further speech he felt to be impossible, he was too deeply unhappy a man for trivialities. He bade her good-bye, ')cling her two hands in his for a long moment; then, with swinging strides, while he retook his way to the station, loping that Heaven would preserve him from a second encounter with Mr. Fish, His prayer was granted.	"God !" he muttered in the train, "how am I going to get through my life without her ?"CHAPTER IVWHICH INTRODUCES MRS. cLINTON-TOMKINMRS. FISH was giving an At-Home. Not a Bridge party, be it marked, but an At-Home to all the "dear dull people" in Loamgate neighbourhood who did nothing, by which Mrs. Fish meant did not play Bridge at two and sixpence a hundred, or even at one and threepence.	Once a year did Mrs. Fish summon these long-suffering people to an afternoon at "Top o' the Hill" because she felt it her duty "to keep in with them" (as they did with her). She did not want them, and neither did they want to come, chiefly because her parties were so fatiguing. Many elderly ladies, indeed, failed to recover from the effects of them till they had summoned their medical advisers and taken tonicky revivifying medicines, for Mrs. Fish believed that no party was a success till her guests had been worked to the last stage of exhaustion.	'Most afternoon At-Homes are so appallingly dull," she remarked to Elfie, who was assisting her in her final preparations for the entertainment of her visitors, "hut mine-well, I'm sure they love them. I find everybody enjoys some form of game, even if they're too stupid to like Bridge, so I evolved this out of my own little head, and the first time I tried it, my party was a roaring success." She was busy tying a fish-hook to a line and dahlia stick. "Now, Miss Charrington, do you think six fishing-rods are sufficient? And have you got the hoot buttons ready in the top hats? The old ladies chiefly play at this and they look such darlings, solemnly fishing. Now let me see-' She referred to a paper in her hand.Fishing' and 'Smelling' Competitions in the library;202	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE'Throwing cards into hats' and 'Daily Mail Hat Trimming' Competitions in the morning room ; 'Picking-up Peppercorns and 'Threading Needles with the left hand' in library; music and chat in drawing-room ; tea in dining-room. I think that's all, and I must rush and get dressed or I shall never be ready. Don't the rooms look sweet ? I tie love winter flowers, especially chrysanthemums, though they do rather make one think of funerals. Thanks so much for your help, and don't forget to be specially nice and attentive to Mrs. ClintonTomkin." Mrs. Fish took the wide stairs with a rush, fell, owing to the tightness of her skirt, picked herself up, and arrived at the top with a series of small leaps: A moment later her bedroom door hanged, another moment, her head popped out to inform Elfie at the top of her voice that Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin was quite the most important personage in Loamgate.U	Elfie approached Mrs. Clinton-Ton1kin a little fearfully for Mrs. Clinton-'I'omkin was the most extraordinary looking old lady she had ever encountered. She wore a bright purple hat as large as a tea-tray and beplumed with feathers as high as tufted palm trees, her cheeks were painted, and her red hair was a wig.	She was seated alone in a corner of the drawing-room, and was the sole occupant of the room. Her attitude was one of defence; Mrs. Fish had made sundry attempts to inveigle her into taking part in one of the competitions, but each had been skilfully repulsed. Now, with her back to the wall and fortified by tea, she was on the defensive against any frontal attack.	She imagined Elfie, in spite of hesitating walk and diffident manner, to be another enemy in disguise, and before the girl had time to speak said : "Thank you very much, but it's no use. I'm not coming."	"Coming!" Elfie looked at her in surprise. "Coming where ?"	"To play at those tom-fool games. I hate games, and I loathe competitions. The very thought of picking up peppercorns fills me with passionate resentment. I don't know who you are. I hope no relation of Mrs. Fish-not that I really mind her knowing my sentiments, and I suppose, poor woman, she means well--.but---- Won't you sit down ?" She pushed a chair towards Elfie. "I noticed you at tea. You looked as though you belonged to some other world and had drifted into this dull over-dressed assemblage by mistake.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	203Would vnu he kind enough to explain who you are ?" Shc unfurled a fan and used it vigorously to her purple face.	Elfie told her, and Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin set up a peal oi derisive laughter. "A housekeeper I Why not inform mevonre a poor-law guardian at once	Because it wouldn't be the truth," replied Elfie with dignity. She thought Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin a very rude old mdv.	"Don't he offended, child, but you look no more like a housekeeper than you look like a-a salmon-trout.""I don't suppose I do."	Mrs. Clintou-Tomkin laughed, and leaning back in bet chair with a gesture of enjoyment, surveyed Elfie with keen scrutiny from a pair of bright quizzical eyes. "Do you know von are remarkably pretty," she said, "indeed, more than pretty."	Elfie flushed and shuffled on her chair. She wondered how she could get away from this eccentric person without appearing impolite.	"But that gown! It's a tragedy! Whatever makes you wear it ?"Now Elfie reddened with anger. She got up.	"Oh, don't, don't go away," cried Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin feverishly. "I didn't mean to offend you, it slipped out. It's a habit I have-saying what I think,""Isn't it a rather dangerous one P'	"Very," agreed the old lady heartily. "Often gets me into trouble, but with the majority of people I don't care, they're such silly asses but you I don't want to hurt. I've taken a fancy to you, I like your face, it's one of the most speaking, sensitive faces I've ever encountered. I love everything beautiful, that's why your dress so offends my senses. Yes, I know you're looking at me, at my poly-chromatic clothes, at my hat, the colour of it above my scarlet wig, but I do it on purpose. Please sit down again and I'll tell you about it. That's better, 1 won't offend again, I promise." Elfie resumed her seat. She now knew Mrs. Clinton-'I'omkin to be not merely eccentric but mad, and she hoped harmless. Anyhow, the old lady was entertaining, and she, Elfie, could, at a bound, make her escape if she exhibited any symptoms of dementia,	"I dress this way to attract attention," began Mrs. Clinton'J'ouikin; "otherwise I should pass through the world unnoticed and unsung. I've always been ugly, and ugly women are usually neglected. Left as God has made me, I am at this moment a bald, toothless, yellow old hag. As it is-well, when I enter an hotel, and I travel a good deal abroad, people inquire who I am. My scarlet wig and painted face and extraordinary clothes knock them all of a heap. 'She must204	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEbe a Somebody to dare to do it,' they say, and they scrape up an acquaintance with me and-they stay, especially the men; for once I have succeeded in engaging their attention they find me not wholly uninteresting, though you'll think it lacking in proper modesty on my part to say so. In time I get quite a little Court about me, and enjoy myself immensely; and all achieved through making up my old face like a-somebody you've never heard of-and wearing clothes like a nightmare and an Eastern divan rolled in one. Don't you think it's a ripping idea ?" Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin gloried in her slang, of which she had quite an extensive vocabulary."I don't know," replied Elfie honestly. "To me--""Yes? I shan't mind."	"It's something of an outrage. Something like a Cubist picture."	"Exactly." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin cackled with delight. "You couldn't have put it better, and look at the sensation Cubist pictures have created. I'm compelled to be violent to attain my object. You need only be beautiful."	"I don't know that I want to attract attention," Elfie demurred."That is only too apparent," said Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin calmly.	"You mean my dress ?" Elfie was determined not again to lose her temper, though it did strike her the whole world seemed bent upon telling her she looked a fright.	"I do. My dear." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin bent forward and tapped her impressively with her fan. "I'm going to speak plainly, just as though I were your mother, I mean grandmother. The gods have provided you with a very bewitching face and figure, your body is beautifully formed, slim, graceful -your movements remind me of young willows in a windand to pitchfork clothes on to it in the way you have done is wicked, a waste of a precious gift, positively a crime." The old lady leant back in her chair and drew a long breath. "I am of the opinion the whole world is losing, or has lost, its sense of beauty. Look around you at the women assembled here today, at the hobble skirts; the older the woman, the hobblier her skirt; the ridiculous, small, hideous, close-fitting hats, more resembling bathing-caps than anything else, designed, it would seem, entirely to conceal one's hair and left eyebrow. Look at Mrs. Fish in her silk-worm-like sheath, from which her plump proportions seem in imminent danger of bursting; but she is naked, so to speak, and unashamed. You have avoided extremes, I admit, but you have 'missed' it in another sense of the word: your gown is inartistically made, the colour is wrong with your hair and eyes and skin, the hem is uneven in length, and it does not fit you anywhere. I am deliberately, outrageously eccentric and ugly and know itAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	205but these women here don't know that they are frights. They are in the fashion, therefore are happy ; and should they, through sheer accident, stumble across something beautiful in design and colouring, something that isn't too tight, or too short, or too long-something that isn't too fiouncy or stripy or shapeless they cast it from them in their insatiable desire for something novel and up-to-date. It makes me sick, tired." Mrs. Clinton-'I'omkin closed her bright eyes and fanned herself with such vigour that the palm-like plumes in her hat waved about as if blown by a strong wind. ''1 long to get hold of a girl, young, soft, beautiful, with pliant limbs such as yours, with a head well set on her shoulders, with a healthy skin and clear eyes and-dress her, just to show what could be done. Why--" Mrs. Clinton-Tumkia suddenly bounded up from her chair with such unexpected activity that Elfie, believing she had been stung by some insect, bounded too. 'What's to prevent my dressing you ?" She stood confronting Elfie, eyes dancing with excitement, her breath coming in hurried little gasps. "Tell me," she repeated, "what's to prevent my dressing you 1' She waited for no reply, but seizing Elfie by the arm, continued at breathless speed. "It's an idea, an inspiration, and it's magnificent! You tell me you are housekeeper herefrom that it's manifest you have your living to make. Why not come and make it with me ? You, though I've only just discovered it, are the very person I've been looking for for years, and I've found you." She paused and looked at Elfie triumphantly, and Elfie said nothing, believing that the first symptoms of dementia had overtaken the old lady.	"Sit down again," commanded Mrs. Clintun-Tomkin, pushing her back into her chair, whilst resuming her own, "and I'll explain, If you'll come and live with me, I'll give you a hundred a year for the pleasure of being allowed to dress you. I don't want you as a companion in the usual sense of the word. I can do my own reading and writing, and the very suggestion of being systematically compaiiioned by a kindly young female, which has been offered to me by officious relations from time immemorial, has made me curse, but I should adore the thought of dressing you, of having an absolutely free hand in the adornment of your face and figure. I am old, though I wouldn't admit it to my relations, who are yearning to see me tucked into my coffin and to have the handling of my bit of money. I am lonely and I want a hobby.""But-"	"You shall be my hobby, and I will give you a hundred a year in exchange. I think that's a fair offer." She beamed upon Elfie. "I've wanted a hobby for some time; people who live alone should never be without one, a hobby keeps them happy-"206	AN UNDRESSED HEROiNE	''But,'' broke in Elfie again, with a shout, trying to stem the old lady's torrent of language, "I don't want to be a hobby."	'Better he a hobby than a housekeeper," said Mrs. ClintonTomkin firmly. "Now listen to me. I know you think I'm mad, don't you ? I see by that expressive countenance of yours that you do, but I'm not. Ask Bitten."''Biffen ?''	"Bitten is my maid, who's lived with me for years. She's one of those absolutely faithful, kind, commonplace, conventional people, who'd refuse to live with me for five minutes if there were any trace of insanity about me. She regards me as peculiar certainly, eccentric perhaps, because 1 speak my mind and say what I think, which few people bother to do."	"it isn't a case of bother," asserted Elfie ; "if everybody said exactly what they thought, everybody would be fighting like tigers and lions."	"Perhaps, but that would be more exciting than telling conventional fibs and buttering one another up. But don't let's waste our time upon these propositions. I'm afraid, every minute, you'll be called away to fish for boot buttons or make hats out of Daily Mails and the Daily Mail might be put to a worse purpose, to my thinking. I want to tell you what your life might and would be if you'd consent to come and live with me." The old lady, dropping her bantering, quizzical manner, became quiet and earnest. Her language was fluent, and there was a distinction about her choice of words that appealed to all that was artistic in Elfie's composition. She had travelled much, seen much, and read much, and she held out further travelling as a bait to Elfie, who admitted to her she had never been abroad.	"You would like to see something of the world ? This place is circumscribed, and the limitations of the Loamgate bridge-playing-set-of-lunatics are beyond belief. Can you imagine, say, the fascination of the Piazza of St. Mark's in Venice on an afternoon in May when it's nearing sunset-time ?" Noting Elfie's aroused interest, she enlarged upon her theme. "Ws one of the most animated and delightful scenes in the world. I would like to take you there and watch your kindling eyes when they rested for the first time upon that glorious fabric of a Church which one feels was never made by earthly hands, but was the consummation of a Vision Splendid of one of the dear Apostles. Or Monte Generoso l Have you ever heard of Monte Ceneroso ? From its summit you look upon, to my thinking, the most glorious panorama in Europe the dreaming blue lake of Lugano, upon whose surface boats, like white butterflies, float-remember you are four thousand feet up-backed by a range of white snow mountains; at your feet wild lilies of the valley, vet with dew, scent the crystallineAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	207air. Can you picture it ? You will think tile an old romantic sentimental fool, but the first time I gazed upon that incomparable, God-given scene, I found my face wet with tears.''	''Oh '' said Flue. She stopped. She must not think of it, must net long for it, most not want to go adventuring with this queer old lady (she had dismissed all idea now of her being mad), because of the Fishes,	'Then, there are the waterways of Venice. You know all about them, of course ; votive seen hundreds of pictures of them and of gondolas threading their way in and out of their fascinating maziness, but you haven't heard the lap of the water against their prows, nor seen it laying and caressing the stone steps and foundations of the ancient palaces, nor poked about and discovered for yourself wonderful old brass knockers on quaint ramshackle houses, and fantastic lanterns, and little lovely Madonnas with eves raised to heaven praying for frail humanity seething below.''	''Oh, don't !'' cried Elfie, clasping and unclasping her hands, whilst w'arnl eager colour rushed to her cheeks.	"And the little old Italian towns, whose pink and yellow houses lean across the narrow tortuous streets just to prop one another up ; and the shade of cool olives, and the scent of mimosa hot in the sun, fringing the shores of the blue Mediterranean."Elfie sprang to her feet. "Yes, yes l" she cried, "but--"''What ?''	''The Fishes I They want me. How could I leave them How could I treat them badly ?"¥	'Are you happy here ?''''They are kind to me.''''Are you contented here ?''	''I ant trying to be. It sounds dull and stodgy, but-doing one's dutv-''	''Youth shouldn't he thinking of ditty, snorted Mrs. ClintonToinkiu, ''it's unnatural. Are you satisfied with your life P'	''Is anybody ever satisfied P' questioned Elfie with sudden bitterness.	Mrs. Clinton-'I'omkin looked at her. Site saw the look of restlessnes that slowly crept into her eyes, and the duaverndg sensitive lips Her heart went out in a wave of warm sympathy towards the girl. ''My dear,'' she said, ''you have had trouble, I can see ; so have 1. ('in done in the world. You, 1 think, are not happy neither am 1. Let its join forces'. we might help one another. I Would try to he decent to yon.'' I-Icr voice, now that the quality of amused raillery had dropped from it, was full of kindliness and beneath the paint and powder on her face shone an expression of svnipatliy and good fellowship. In spite of the wig and colossal hat Mrs. Clinton-'(iankin208	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEno longer appeared grotesque, but an intelligent, human, lonely old lady ''Won't you give me a trial ?''	Torn with indecision, Elfie stood with her hands pressed against her eyes. Would it be fair, kind ?''	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin watched her and waited. She could afford to wait. Prescience told her that victory was to be hers if she made no false move. She got up. "Don't hurry, think it over. Let me know in a week. I start for the Continent in February, but I should have to dress you first. I'm going to have a look at the poor old ladies fishing for boot buttons and-have a chat with Mrs. Fish. She's not an unkind woman, and a reasonable one, I should imagine, if you got her the right way. Here is my card, write to me when you've made up your mind. Good-bye."BOOK IVELFIE GOES ABROADCHAPTER 1THE DRESSING OF ELFIEA MONTH later Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin and Elfie Charriugton might have been discovered during the greater part of each dreary, wet January day in the best lighted, most luxuriously carpeted and heated, and, incidentally, the most expensive shops in London.	Elfie was inwardly bored, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin in the seventh heaven of delight. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkio had a real gift for 'clothes" ; her sense of colour was good, her sense of line and form was better, and her choice of textures could not have been surpassed by the most famous niodistes of Paris and Vienna. In her capable hands Elfie was rapidly being transformed from a brown moth into a radiant butterfly. Elfie tried to assume interest in the metamorphosis. She permitted herself to be twisted and turned, pinned and chalked by dressmakers and tailors with perfect patience if not with wild enthusiasm but to her so much time expended on the mere adornment of her person seemed a wicked wasteshe would have liked to be with Mrs. Cliuton-Tomkin at concerts, the opera, picture galleries, she who, owing to pecuniaryAN UNDRESSED hEROINE	209limitations, had seen and heard so little in the old days (they were staying at an lintel in town), but she made no complaint. She kept to her part of the bargain to the letter. She had agreed that Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin should have a free hand in dressing her, and she was being dressed, there was not a doubt about that. Sometimes she trembled at the very thought of the bills. Mrs. Ciinton-Tomkin was, manifestly, well off, but was she sufficiently wealthy to go flinging about ten or twenty-pound notes for just a wisp of a gown or a 'bit of a coat ?" Four guineas for one hat to Elfie appeared lawless extravagance, and twenty-five for a set of furs nothing short of a crime. When she ventured to expostulate Mrs. ClintonTomkin merely laughed, and told her to mind her own affairs. "It is cheap at the price," the old lady pronounced; "an ungratified desire of years' standing is now being gratified I didn't know it was there, that it existed, it was dormant, but now that I do know-well, if I turn it into a veritable orgy of clothes I will brook no interference. Presently we will go abroad, I'm nearly through, then-we'll be known as Beauty and the Beast. It's inevitable; the public, the travelling public more especially, so full is its head of cathedrals, sculpture, pictures, and National monuments, lacks originality. Beauty and the Beast we shall become"-she chuckled-"men will gather round us, ministers, attaches, ambassadors will clamour for introductions.""What nonsense !" said Elfie, with a hot face.	I didn't suggest introductions to you," said Mrs. ClintonTomkin slyly; "they might throw you a crumb of their favour when they'd finished with me."	Elfie laughed at her own slip: she was never able to hold her own in repartee with Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, and never attempted it.	"Have you decided yet where we are to go ?" she inquired one day.	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkiii replied that she hadn't. She was busy with a wine list; they were lunching at the Ritz. She said she must have something extra dry and stimulating in the way of beverage, seeing that so much of her vitality had been expended upon RIfle's amber charmeuse, which had refused to drape properly. It had come right in the end, certainly, because she, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, had been firm as a rock with the dressmaker, and had, figuratively speaking, dug a long hat-pin into the calf of one of the kneeling legs of the dressmaker when she had exhibited signs of either temper or collapse. "It's a dream now, all your evening frocks are delicious, and if at Monte Carlo, Biarritz, Cap Martin, or wherever I decide to launch her, My Arid does not take flight with one of the most eligible par-' She stopped at the expressionAN UNDRESSED hEROINE	211bonnet with neat white strings of widowhood.''	Rifle could not help laughing. She was not surprised that once this old lady had gained her little court it remained faithful to her.	'You'd rather not tell me, perhaps, why you so much dislike men ?" Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin heaped spoonfuls of crystals into her coffee."I didn't say that. On the contrary, I like them.""Marriage, then ?"	"Because," said RIfle, a little desperately-she resented this plumbing of her soul's depths, yet she felt it would be as well to tell Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin her story, it might prevent her from pitching her (RIfle went hot with resentment at the bare thought) at eligible men's heads, trying to marry her off -''because ... Oh, I don't feel I can talk about it here, it's so hot and crowded." She got up involuntarily, with her eyes on the door, and in them was an expression that reminded Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin of a young spaniel who longs to be outside the closed door and away in the open.	"Very well, I've finished, so we'll go." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin called for the bill, tipped handsomely, and led the way from the restaurant. "We will go for a little turn in the park before we continue our shopping." She commanded the commissionaire to summon a taxi. "Now," she said, as they passed through the gates at Hyde Park Corner, "it is peaceful here. But don't tell me your story if you'd prefer my not knowing. I've commandeered your body, your most charming person, but I'm not the keeper of your soul." She touched RIfle's hand as she spoke ; she had grown very fond of the girl.	"I think I'd rather you knew," returned Elfie, "it may restrain you from, forgive my putting it so frankly, worrying me with poor defencelsss young men who just want to be let alone."	"Then they oughtn't to want to be let alone.," said the old lady severely. "If they do, when girls such as you are knocking about, there's something wrong with them, they're abnormal and want beating. I should imagine your Brian Ingleby" (this was only a clever shot she had heard RIfle mention the name when speaking of Richmond and her friends) "needs a good castigation, doesn't he ? But proceed. We've to he at Madame Du Cane's to see the velour hats at three o'clock."	When RIfle had finished-and she told her story as unemotionally and badly as the purveyors of racing news announce the scratching of a favourite in the evening specials-there was silence for a space. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin appeared absorbed in trying to reckon the number of miles they had travelledAN UNDRESSED it EItOINE	211	[			bonnet with neat white strings of widowhood.''		¥		RIfle could not help laughing. She was not surprised that				once this old lady had gained her little court it remained faith-				ful to her.					"You'd rather not tell me, perhaps, why you so much dislike				men ?" Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin heaped spoonfuls of crystals				into her coffee.					"I didn't say that. On the contrary, I like them."					"Marriage, then ?"					"Because," said RIfle, a little desperately-she resented				this plumbing of her soul's depths, yet she felt it would be as				well to tell Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin her story, it might prevent				her from pitching her (RIfle went hot with resentment at the				bare thought) at eligible men's heads, trying to marry her off-"because ... Oh, I don't feel I can talk about it here,it's so hot and crowded." She got up involuntarily, with hereyes on the door, and in them was an expression that remindedMrs. Clinton-Tomkio of a young spaniel who longs to be out-side the closed door and away in the open.	"Very well, I've finished, so we'll go." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin called for the bill, tipped handsomely, and led the way from the restaurant. "We will go for a little turn in the park before we continue our shopping." She commanded the commissionaire to summon a taxi. "Now," she said, as they passed through the gates at Hyde Park Corner, "it is peaceful here. But don't tell me your story if you'd prefer my not knowing. I've commandeered your body, your most charming person, but I'm not the keeper of your soul." She touched Elfie's hand as she spoke; she had grown very fond of the girl.	"I think I'd rather you knew," returned RIfle, "it may restrain you from, forgive my putting it so frankly, worrying me with poor defencelsss young men who just want to be let alone."	"Then they oughtn't to want to be let alone," said the old lady severely. "If they do, when girls such as you are knocking about, there's something wrong with them, they're abnormal and want beating. I should imagine your Brian Ingleby" (this was only a clever shot; she had heard RIfle mention the name when speaking of Richmond and her friends) "needs a good castigation, doesn't lie ? But proceed. We've to be at Madame Du Cane's to see the velour hats at three o'clock."	When Elfie had finished-and she told her story as unemotionally and badly as the purveyors of racing news announce the scratching of a favourite in the evening specials-there was silence for a space. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin appeared absorbed in trying to reckon the number of miles they had travelled212	AN	UNDRESSED	11E EOIflround the park for the three and sixpence the taxi-meter registered, then she said 'To put it in plain, unvarnished language, this Mr. Inglehy" (she noted with satisfaction that Line did not correct her) "really brought the engagement to an end because he did not approve of your clothes ?""Yes."	"The man was a beast, of course. Yet I suppose there was something to be said on his side."''Do -,-on think so ?''	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin nodded. "I do. My Adolphus, or, I should say, my and all the other women's Adolphus, was in the habit of wearing trousers of a large check that check hurt in(! physically, and I always felt grateful when he removed it, if only temporarily, to the vision of his latest inaInorata." Turning to glance at Elfie, Mrs. Clintnn-Tomkin saw an expression in her eyes which brought her to pause. "You don't mean to say you still care for this man ?" she queried.	"No." Elfie looked through the window at the stark bare trees and grimy hushes of rhododendron. A few flakes of snow had begun to fall, and the world looked cold and dismal. She gave a little shiver. "At least, I don't think I do but if I were to try to explain my feelings I'm afraid you wouldn't understand.''"\Vby 1'	"Because I iinagme you've never really known what it is to love a person very, very much, have you P You don't know how.''	There was silence. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin was fumbling in a vast moire hag, presumably for her purse in readiness for the fare that her hand trembled was unnoticed by Elfie. "I had a child once," she said at length, "a boy, lie lived to be thirteen, then-he died." She spoke quietly, and her tone was perfectly expressionless. "And you wonder if I've known what it is to love When he died I ceased to live-existence isn't life. I always imagine I know the sensations of a jelly fish stranded on a sandy beach when it moves vaguely and torpidly in a futile attempt to get hack to the water. La, la Flow I'm talking! But what you want to suggest is that once having learned to love a person, it is difficult to unlearn to love all in a minute ?''	"Yes," replxed Elfie: "and I'm sorry I said that. .	Idid not know."	"It's all right, child. How could you know P' Speaking through the tube, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin commanded the driver to turn and take them to South Moltnn Street. Once again only did she refer to Brian, and that was to make an inquiry as to where he was. And when she heard "somewhere abr iad, she made no further comment, but thought the more.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	213II	The hats chosen, another fitting accomplished, and tea partaken of at Rumpelmayer's, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin accompanied Elfie to the Langhani Hotel, where they were staying, and there left her on the plea that she had a little private business of her own to transact. Bifien would look after Elfie.	"You might, if you want something to do, glance through that horde of literature I obtained at Cook's," she suggested. "Your wardrobe is progressing so favourably that I think we can manage to get away in two or three days from now; this abominable climate doesn't tempt one to remain." She had retained the taxi, and in a voice inaudible to RIfle she ave the driver instructions as to where he was to proceed. 'I don't know the exact whereabouts of the address I want. I fancy it will be off the main street in the centre of the town, but we can inquire when we get to Richmond." She got into the cab and leaned from the window for a parting word with Elfie. "Don't sit about alone ; I noticed there were several new arrivals in the shape of-men. You might, when you are tired of Cook's Guides, practise the new way of doing your hair. Good-bye." She sat for some time hunched up in the back of the cab, deep in thought. Her pink soup-plate of a hat slid unheeded over one frowning eyebrow, her small, wellgloved hands were clasped firmly before her, her eyes saw not the sombre gloom of the landscape as the cab emerged gradually from crowded thoroughfares and sped through Putney, Barnes, and the Upper Richmond Road, hut gazed ruminatingly into space. She was thinking hard, trying to recollect all that Elfie had told her of Richmond, her friends, her life.	"I've got it," she cried at length in triumph, "it was Dobbs I There can be only one Dobbs, fishmonger, in Richmond, but if there should be two, I'll descend upon both. Dobhs and the whereabouts of Mr. Brian Ingleby shall be run to earth somehow tonight, or my name is not Araminta ClintonTomlcin." This decision made to her entire satisfaction, she closed her eyes and composed herself for a little slumber, and she did not open them again till the taxi, drawing up with a sudden jerk, nearly precipitated her on to her nose. The driver, who had descended from his seat, was at the window respectfully inquiring where he was to go next. They had arnved at Richmond."To the post office," replied Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin fiercely,and don't apply your brakes next time, young man, as214	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEthough desirous of shooting me into another world. Drive on.	She straightened her hat, drew her handsome sables about her, and majestically, when the cab again stopped (and this time with the slow and gentle deliberation of a ship coming into port), stepped forth on to the pavement and passed into the post office.	The address she was seeking obtained from an obliging clerk, she reappeared and told the meek chauffeur to drive her to the end of Brewers Lane, via the Green. "Proceed along this street and take the first turning to the right and again to the right," she commanded in magisterial tones; and when the nan, who believed he was at least taking her to visit royalty, saw her pass into Mr. Dobbs's bit of a shop, he could scarcely believe his own senses, and rubbed his eyes to assure himself he was neither asleep, dreaming, nor drunk.	The little shop was empty, and Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin rapped with the top of her umbrella smartly on the slab, there being no counter to assault.Noiselessly and instantaneously Mr. Dobbs appeared.	"Oh !" she ejaculated. Elfie, she recollected, had said Mr. Dobbs was large, but this-! She regarded his gargantuan, egg-shaped proportions and vast, calm, benign countenance with interest, if not with suppressed excitement. Would he be readily "drawn" ? Fat people, her experience had been, were usually responsive, it was the lean kind who kept their own counsel and said nothing-at least, nothing that anybody ever wanted to know.	She started well, for she purchased four pounds of halibut that Mr. Dobbs had greatly feared would be left on his hands, also a dozen crayfish. Mr. Dobbs marvelled a little that so handsomely dressed a lady should be shopping at this hour of night, and carrying her purchases with her own hands. Still, ladies did such queer things in these days ! He wondered, as he added string to the parcel, string not usually being thrown in, who she was and where she lived. New people, rich and prosperous, had come to Downe Terrace; but they would be more likely to patronize Chrisp, or the new shop at the corner (Mr. Dobbs still regarded the shop at the corner as nothing but an impertinent upstart). Moreover, why and how should new Downe Terrace people find him out ? They would have no object in coming down Brewers Lane on a cold winter evening.	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin answered his unspoken questions: "I don't live here, but I happened to be in Richmond" (this was the absolute truth) "and I wanted some fish" (this was equally untrue-for, later, she presented the halibut and crayfish to the amazed chauffeur, who decided she was a lunatic), 11 and 1 saw your shop. I believe you once knew a friend ofAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	215mine, Miss Charring ton ?" Nothing could have surpassed the airs' carelessness of her manner, and, unsuspectingly, simple Mr. Dobbs walked into the trap.	"Know her, ma'am !" lie ejaculated. "Why, I've known Miss Elfie, that's what we call her, me and i\lrs. Dobbs, sinceshe was little more'n a baby.-"Now, have von ?'' said Mrs. Clinton-Tonikni. She was'catching with apparently absorbed interest the strong loopMr. Dobbs was making for her parcel.	"I have, ma'am. She left Richmond some months ago, and we miss her that much I can't describe. She lost her father, and then-well, she had some other trouble."	"You mean the breaking-off of her marriage ?" queried Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin softly. ''1 know it was very sad.''	"Have you seen her lately, ma'am, if you'll excuse my askin' you ? She was with some people named Fish, at a place called Loamgate."	"She was, you're quite right. Yes, I've seen her quite lately." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin received her parcel, and exhibited signs of withdrawing.	"And how was she lookin' ?" inquired Mr. Dobbs eagerly. "Eh, Mrs. Dobbs will be that interested. I'm sorry she's out. She's (loin' the weekly shoppin' at Hoppin's round the corner. I hope Miss Elfie's well, ma'am. There's never a day passes I don't think of her."	"She was looking pretty well when I last saw her," replied Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, in a slightly absentminded fashion. She was counting her change, and Mr. Dobbs most earnestly wished she wouldn't (he knew it was quite correct) and world give him some further particulars about his dear Miss RIfle.''And cheerful ?'' he queried.	"Well, as cheerful as one could expect after such a-" Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin broke off delicately.	"I know," agreed Mr. Dobbs. "It was a dreadful blow to everybody, and amazin'. I could scarcely believe it, nor could Mrs. Dobbs. Miss Elfie and Mr. Brian had known each other since they was children. She looked that ill after he went abroad, and I don't wonder. I do hear as Mrs. Ingleby has joined him."	"Really ! Do you happen to know where they are? I shall be seeing Miss Charrington again .... Oh, I wonder if you'd be good enough to put a little more paper round my parcel." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin was holding the parcel in her delicately gloved hands as though it were trying to bite her. "I think the halibut was a little wet, and I've a long way togo."	"With pleasure, ma'am." Mr. Dobbs would have encompassed it with a dozen sheets of brown paper. Here was a216	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEheaven-sent opportunity for further talk. Where are Mrs. Ingleby and Mr. Brian, you ask, ma'am ? Well, I did hear; I got it from Stroud, that's their butler, but I don't exactly remember the name. It was somewhere in It'ly, that I do know.""Rome, possibly ? There, that will do nicely.'	"Just a bit more string, ma'am, to make a good job of it. No, it wasn't Rome, it was a funny name, made me think of something else. I shall remember in a minute, I mean the thing it reminded me of-1 know, an arbour and the fins of a fish."	"An arbour and the fins of a fish !" Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin was mystified."An harbour I mean.""Do you mean an arbour or a harbour?'	Mr. Dobbs scratched his bead and reflected. "Well, I hardly know what I do mean, I'm that muddled. I've got it"-illumination came to him--by arbour I mean harbour, which means port. There The name begins with portPort-something."	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin gave a sudden and surprising skip. "I, too, have got it," she cried. "Portofino. Isn't that it? Porto-Porto; fins of a fish-fino; Portofino,"	"It is," said Mr. Dobbs, "and if I may make so bold, I don't think anyone but Miss Rifle herself could have guessed it. It was wonderful, ma'am." He looked at Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin with admiration,	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin acknowledged the compliment, received her parcel, expressed her pleasure at having made Mr. Dobbs's acquaintance, and bidding him good-night, left the little shop with an extraordinary sense of elation. "I am wasted as a private individual," she said to herself as she drove back, "with my histrionic gifts, I should have been on the Staff at Scotland Yard, or in the Diplomatic Service; to any or all I should have been an ornament." She fell to chuckling, and the driver, could he have heard her above the noise of the traffic, would have certainly consigned her to Bedlam had he been allowed any say in the matter.CHAPTER IIIN WHICH HUMI'HRY DoyLE GETS INTO TROUBLE;AND OUT OF IT AGAINFOR two days Biffen had been packing, her prim, black,AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	217respectable person almost lost to view in a veritable storm of white tissue paper, and in the yawning depths of trunks. When she emerged it was with an apopletie appearance, and a pious hope (inwardly) that never again would she have to pack such extensive and varied wardrobes for any two single human beings. There was variety about the wardrobes, that she was forced to admit ; but never had she met more extraordinary or hideous garments than those she laid in between folds of soft paper, her mistress's, and never anything lovelier than those of Miss Charrington's trunks.	To her unimaginative mind it was inconceivable that these garments should have been chosen by one and the same person. "She must just always go dotty when she shops for herself, that's all," she decided, and then dismissed the subject from her mind. Biffen was never equal to sustained thought. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin had to wear the magenta jam-pot hat, and the silk dress that recalled her grandmother's patchwork quilt, and not she. So why worry? But it must be confessed that Biffen, though customarily quite a mild person, handled the jam-pot hat a little savagely; it was so tall, and would not fit in to anything, and nothing would fit into it. "It wants a hat-box all to itself, and there isn't one." But for her devotion and, at the same time, fear of her mistress, Biffen, because she was tired, might quite conceivably have sat upon it.	Elfie had been not a little surprised when Mrs. ClintonTomkin had announced (the morning following her visit to Richmond) that Portofino was to be their destination, and not a little pleased.	She had heard of the beauty and quaint charm of the little Italian fishing-town from Brian and had longed to see it, but after all Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's talk of the French Riviera, Monte Carlo, Nice, and Cap Martin, that she should decide suddenly on a small and obscure place caused Elfie to wonder.	"Read this," said Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin deceitfully, "and you will wonder no longer. I got it from Cook's. It is the most delightful piece of literature I've met for years. The proprietor of the Hotel Majestique at Portofino, if he be the author of it, must be worth knowing and cultivating, in fact so much do I yearn to make his acquaintance I can scarcely wait till I get there." She handed Elfe a small paper-backed guide-book to Portofino and watched her while she read it.	"Isn't it delicious? The heartrending picture drawn of all the towns in the French Riviera, infested with microbes scattered by consumptive visitors, the immunity of Portofino from this plague of germs, the description of visitors arriving from 'damp, harsh, soothy, fog-laden England' with their218	AN UNDRESSED HEROINElode of misery, sore throats and disease, and losing them instantaneously (the misery, sore throats, and disease) in the magical air and sun of this gem of the Mediterranean is sublime. And the complacency of the little booklet I I like the touch about the Hotel Majestique being designed solely for the cornfort of visitors, and drawing especial attention to the fact of the safe working of its lift, just as though the object of every other hotel in Europe was to render the lot of its clientele entirely wretched and to hurl the said clientele to instant destruction, should it rashly adventure itself in the hotel's unreliable ascen.seurs. When I glanced through the pamphlet at Cook's I said 'This is the place for me the HOtel Majestique should be encouraged in its efforts to benefit suffering humanity'. And I took the tickets on the spot." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin looked at Elfie in triumph. "Cap Martin, Monte Carlo, Biarritz, and the rest of my proposed itinerary can wait. Portofino, I feel, cannot. Look at the picture of the little harbour, the houses clustered in a semicircle round the quay! Could you imagine anything more picturesque? And this and this I" Rapidly she turned the pages of the hook-. RIfle had never seen her so roused, and her enthusiasm was contagious. She, too, became fired,	"I know," she said; "I've heard of it. A friend of mine, Mr. Inglc'by, in fact"-she displayed no emotion as she pronounced his name-"went there a couple of springs ago. He said it was delightful ; so quaint and unspoiled. I'm glad 1 shall have an opportunity of seeing it."	"He's abroad now, I think you said, didn't you ?" Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin paused to laugh at another perfect bit of prose perpetrated by the proprietor of the "Majestique".	I wonder" (carelessly) "if we shall stumble across him it's a small world." She held her breath while she awaited Elfie's reply, wondering if she dared too much. The girl was sharp. Would she detect her, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's, deep-laid design	But no ; Elfie's answer at once set her fears at rest "I don't think it's in the least likely. He and his mother are at Costabclle, and are to be there for some weeks; he has taken up golf rather vigorously. I heard from Mrs. Inglehy a few days ago. She said they might possibly move on, as she herself was weary of the golf and bridge fiends congregated at their hotel, but she did not think it very likely, as she was not feeling well, and rather dreaded any further travelling."	"Ah, then, we are not likely to meet, for Costabelle won't see me," pronounced Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin. And if anyone had suggested to her that she was developing into a most deceitful old lady, she would not only have been surprised at the indictment, but filled with resentment thereat. The taskAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	219she had embarked upon of reuniting two foolish young people she regarded as a most praiseworthy effort.II	It was about nine o'clock the evening before their departure when Humphry Doyle, clad in a long covert coat, suddenly, and unannounced, appeared in the lounge of the Langham Hotel. He had called to say good-bye to Elfie, Colonel Wyckham having informed him of her impending departure.	"I felt I must come," he said ; he had found her aloneMrs. Clinton-Tomkin, through the exigencies of impending travel, having momentarily relaxed her duenna-like shepherding of the girl-drinking her coffee and idly watching the movements of the hotel visitors. "May I stay a littie while ? I promise," seeing a sudden access of colour to her cheeks, and that she was nervous of him, "I won't worry you."	At once she was reassured. When Humphry made a promise he kept it. She motioned him to a seat, asked him if he would remove his coat, and invited him to have some coffee, "I will go and tell Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin. She is busy in the reading-room with a Bradshaw. She never trusts railway officials. With a Bradshaw, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin reminds one of a happy dog with a nice mutton bone."	Humphry laughed, and begged that she should be left with her bone in peace.	"It will be months before I see you again, Elfie," he said depressedly. "Let us be alone for a little while. I have not come to see her, but you."	"But Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's rather particular," demurred Elfie. She got up, and in one of the new pretty frocks looked very attractive."About what ?""My being alone in places like this.""You were alone when I came in," he argued.	"I mean alone with-with a man." To her own annoyance Elfie felt the colour again fly to her cheeks. She could not have believed she could be so stupid and self-conscious with an old friend like Humphry. "It's all his tiresome lovemaking," she thought, and to herself reproached him bitterly for spoiling their pleasant friendship.	"What rubbish!" he said, "when I've known you since you were little more than a baby. I'm not going to run away with you, slim thing though you are. Please sit down, Elfie. I can't remain seated while you stand, and I'm dog-tired."He spoke ruefully. "I've prolTilsed you I won't---"220	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"You look tired," she broke in, while sitting clown hurncdly. "Aren't you well, or are you working too hard 1'	"I think I want a holiday. People imagine we've nothing to do at the Admiralty but play about, and it's a grievous error," he grumbled. "I envy you, going away to fine weather and sunshine. I'm sick of London, with its fog and gloom: it's a beastly hole, and I'm dead tired of Wistaria Terracewithout you it's-"	"Tell me about it, the dear Terrace" ; skilfully she skated away from thin ice. "How is it looking ?""Wet," he replied laconically.	"Yes, it will be at this time of the year; and after all the rain of late I suppose the river is in flood, and the Beloved Isle, when the tide is up, disappears from view, and the water washes the base of the Terrace steps. But even then it's wonderfully attractive, Humphry. Now, isn't it ?" She succeeded in keeping the yearning note from her voice for the much-loved little home, and he did not see the sad reminiscent look in her eyes, which were turned from him.	He grunted dissent. "It depends on what you like. If you're keen on dank trees, rushing brown flood water, and mud deposited on the towing-paths------"	"But there are the sea-gulls and the red sunsets lighting up the fascinating waste of waters on the meadows."	"If you're keen on ooze and slime and rheumatism and every form of disease wandering about in search of a good incubating ground," Humphry persisted, "you'll certainly find them there."	She laughed at his lugubriousness. "You certainly want a holiday. Why don't you take two of the six weeks you're entitled to now? You can, I suppose, if you like ?"	"I think it could be arranged, but where could I go? England is not very attractive at this time of the year."	"But why England ? There are other parts of the world." Elfie, after hours spent with Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin in projected travel, felt quite a seasoned globe-trotter.	"Why, that's true I" Humphry sat in contemplative silence for a while. He asked her permission to smoke and lighted a cigarette. Dropping the match into an ashtray which the hall porter handed to him he continued: "You've presented me with an idea; I could go abroad too. There's no earthly reason why I shouldn't, is there ?" His manner suggested opposition on her part to this proposal."None whatever," she replied calmly.	"I've always wanted to go abroad, but I've been so infernally lazy. Now I feel I could muster the energy and the sun calls to me."I should, then, obey its call," she said.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	SEE"But where V'"The warmest places, I believe, are to be found in the FrenchRiviera. Mentone is sheltered, and Mrs. Clinton-Tornkln likesFlyeres, though she finds it a bit dull. Then-""Where are you going ?" he interrupted."Then, Monte Carlo and Cap Martin-""Where are you going 1¡'"Are wonderfully situated; they are bathed in sunshine."	"Oh," he groaned, "do stop. I want sun, but not sunstroke. Where are you going, Elfie ? Won't you tell meShe shook her head."Why not ?"She did not reply."I suppose you don't want me in the same place ?"	"It isn't that, Humphry." She could not wound him, and so quickly dash the ardour and enthusiasm which were, for once, animating his whole person, "but-""Yes ?" He leaned towards her impatiently.	"There's Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin; I don't think she would like it.""Hang Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin I"	"Tut! tut I" There was a cackling laugh behind them. "Why hang Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, young man?" That lady herself appeared. "I am Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, and I'm Interested to learn, for, to the best of my knowledge, I've never met you before."Humphry was mute.	The lady sat down composedly and studied him. "And now that I do see you I rather like your looks. Don't stare as though you'd encountered a ghost. I'm odd-looking, I admit, but I'm too red and substantial to be mistaken for an apparition. Tell me in what respect I have so aroused your animosity ?"	Humphry seized the bull by the horns; there was nothing else to be done. "I'm sorry," he said. "I must apologize, but-of couMe, you were not meant to overhear my-my remark.""Your expletive, you mean."	"Well, scarcely that; strictly speaking, an expletive means an oath."	"We won't split hairs about a trifle," she laughed. She was enjoying this young man. She liked the way he tackled an awkward position, and she liked his voice, and the slightly deferential way he stood before her (Humphry was invariably polite to elderly people). "And I could scarcely help hearing you, for your-observation we'll call it, was a shout."	"I did not mean it personally. I assure you, but in general."222	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	are making things worse," she chuckled "but won't you sit down while you explain ?"	"I asked Miss Charrington your destination abroad. I am in need of a holiday, and would like to go to the same placewe are old friends. She refused to tell me on the ground that you would object, and I became annoyed. Hence my uiigearded expression. repeat I am sorry and I hope you will accept my apology." i-Iumphrv was unaware that, in addition to being sorry, he sounded a little impatient at the interruption.	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's bright old eyes twinkled beneath her made-up brows. She did not know who this very direct-ofspeech person was, but she saw that he was a gentleman, and she made up her mind to cultivate him, quite regardless of LIlies feelings in the matter. She liked young men, as she always frankly stated, and she liked them still more when they were a lithe out of the ordinary.	"We are going to Portofino in the Italian Riviera, and the place, though small, is, I should think, large enough to accomodate us all, if you particularly want to spend a holiday there. Miss Charriegton" (she challenged Elfie with a humorous and at the same time very determined look) "is mistaken I haven't the least objection to any of her friends going to Portofino if they desire it besides, why should I ? I don't own the place. We are going to the 'Majestique', whose primary object is the comfort of its visitors and its greatest attraction the safety of its lift. I will lend you a booklet on the subject. I have it here." She produced it from her moire bag. "Don't lose it, it's a literary gem and comforts me when I'm depressed."	i-iuinphry expressed his gratitude in warm tones and looked at Elfie, but she did not return his glance her eyes were bent studiously upon the floor,	"I won't ask you to travel with us, because I am a slow and an erratic traveller. I never permit myself to get over-tired. I break my journeys at many different stages the horrors of all night travelling, crowded trains, and selfish, pushing, excitable people are not for me, therefore I arrive at my destination fresh, amiable, and having thoroughly enjoyed the journey. Men, too, if you'll excuse my saying so, I find an incubus on a journey. You assume they are going to he helpfitl, and all they do is to get in your way and cause you to miss trains.''''But why ?" inquired Humphrv.	"Because their British independence and insular dislike to ask questions prevent their making necessary inquiries relative to the movements of unreliable Continental trains. Rather than ask, they prefer to see trains whizzing out of stations, and leaving them behind on platforms. I should imagine you would be of that type."AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	22,1	l-Iumphry laughed. 'Maybe," lie said as he got up. "But I swear I will arrive at Portofino as expeditiously as it is possible, and possibly before you.''	''No doubt, I propose to take four days over the journey, and contemplate staying a couple of nights in Paris ; I want to find a maid there for Miss Charringtou. Good-bye, Mr. -I don't know your name-Doyle. Good-bye, Mr. Doyle. We will meet again-let me see, where did those people in Shakespeare or the Bible meet ? Philippi Thank you. We will meet again at Philippi."	When Humphry had gone, Mrs. Clintou-Tomkin turned to RIfle and remarked "That young man wants to marry you, I suppose ? Pardon my asking you, but as your chaperonRifle replied in the affirmative, and a little shortly.	"I hope you are not annoyed with me. I liked him, and I thought lie would he an addition to our party.''"But is it fair to him ?" demanded Rifle.	"Mr. Doyle is quite capable of taking care of himself, that I can plainly see,'' returned Mrs. Clintou-Tomkin "and if the poor thing wants to go to Portolino, why shouldn't he ?''	Finding this question unanswerable, Rifle suggested she would like to go to bed, and she was met with a ''By all means, my dear, and you will be fresh for the journey tomorrow."	Left alone, Mrs. Cliutun-l'omkin sat musing for a while every now and again she indulged in a little, pleasurable chuckle. "Things are going to happen," she informed herself, "and playing one young man off against another will be the most interesting experience I've had for many a year. Lord, how much in love this one is And if the other is a tenth part as keen on the girl, when he sees into what she's been transformed, I predict we shall see some fun."CHAPTER IIIPOaTOFINONOT only did Mrs. Clintou-Tomkiu travel slowly after themanner of an Eastern Potentate, but imperially. No expensewas spared to secure her and her attendant's comfort. Porters,ticket-collectors, guards, engine-drivers even (report had itthat she had once roundly trounced a driver for his ear-splittingwhistles when about to dive into tunnels), bowed down before224	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEher. She sat in the midst of cushions, rugs, hooks, magazines, thermos flasks, cognac, can-dc-Cologne, foot-warmers, and a thousand other aids to comfort, clad in a bright petunia furlined travelling cloak with many and capacious pockets, crowned by an orange velvet close-fitting motor-bonnet, from which her rouged and powdered face beamed brightly, whilst giving directions to the faithful Biffen directions which, by the way, were entirely unnecessary, for Biffen, now accustomed to this annual migration of her mistress to southern climes, was as much at home in douanes as she was in Harrod's Stores, and as accustomed to blowing up air cushions, regulating the heat of carriages, tipping blue-bloused porters, and securing seats for luncheon in restaurant cars, as she was accustomed at home to carry to her mistress her early morning cup of tea. If Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin projected the journey in a large and masterly fashion, Biffen saw that its minute were carried out with scrupulous care. So when Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin claimed that she arrived at her destination less tired and strained than when she descended from her Daimler car after an hour's corkscrewing in the congested streets of London, she spoke the truth.	She timed the hour of their arrival at the Hotel Majestique with strategic cunning, namely at three o'clock in the afternoon. This she achieved by spending the previous night at Genoa in conjunction with a pleasant quarter of an honr's poring over a difficult local Italian time-table. The more involved a time-table, the better was Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin pleased. "There is a train," she said, "which will land us at Santa Margherita at two-fifteen. We drive from there to Portofino. I have wired to the management of the 'Majestique' to send to meet us. That will give us nice time in the morning before starting to see the palaces in Genoa."	The object of this carefully-laid plan that three o'clock should he the hour for their arrival at the "Majestique" calls for explanation. At three o'clock of an afternoon at foreign hotel-, few, if any, of the visitors are visible. Either they are absent expeclitioning, or resting on their beds. It is too early for tea in verandahs or lounges, so new arrivals escape scrutiny. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin most ardently desired to escape scrutiny (for about the first time in her life), but this apparent shrinking modesty was not on her own, but Elfie's account. Elfie 1w 110 possible chance must be seen till dinner-time . . . . Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin sighed pleasurably to herself as she allowed her fancy to envisage the girl's entrance into the dining-room.	But her heart beat a trifle more rapidly than was its custom as the carriage (she had refused to enter the hotel bus, which she had pronounced stuffy and as only suitable for luggage, and Biffen had had the good fortune to secure an open fly) drove upAN		UNORESSILL)	hEROINE	225the steep, sinuous, shady drive to the hotel entrance, which consisted of glass doors opening into a handsome enclosed verandah. 'Would there he anyone about beyond a concierge and porters ? Would the jade luck, turning the tables upon her while laughing in her sleeve, have cajoled Mr. Doyle (Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin would have staked her last shilling on that young man being already installed at the hotel) or Mr. Brian Iaglebv into lingering in the verandah over coffee and cigarettes? Elfie was not looking her best, her hat was on one sideher hair was badly done (the new maid, Seraphine, was to try her prentice hand on it tonight). Not for a small fortune would Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin have had her protge gazed upon by the two young men at such an inauspicious moment.	But fortune was kind no one was present save an old gentleman with a gouty leg who reclined on a chaise longue and who was very snoringly asleep. Like a whirlwind Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin swept her party into the hall and up the stairs to their rooms, deaf to the bowing proprietor's offer of lifts and chambermaids. I know the numbers of our rooms," she said, "five, five, eleven, twelve they won't be difficult to find." If she waited for a fraction of a second, for a slow concierge or chambermaid to precede them up the stairs, who could tell if ..one of those inglebys or the solemn dark young man" might not suddenly appear on the scene ? She would take no risks.	Elfie, breathless, sat down upon her bed and wondered why this extraordinary hurry. Perhaps Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, fired, as they drove from the station, by the lovely glimpses of sea and the delicious little harbour, and, on the opposite side, green hills rolling up to the sky-line crowned 011 the top by a yellow church, was eager to cast her travelling things and he out exploring this new' and heavenly world. Elfie knew' that she was. Had she not seen a mimosa tree as they came along the drive ?-a mimosa tree standing out on a craggy olive-clad slope to the left of the hotel, and which her quick eyes had discerned could be gained by a zig-zag path and a white gate. The very thought of standing beneath a mimosa tree in full bloom and drinking in its golden fragrance on this warm, wondrous afternoon, filled her with delight. She felt she must go at once, not waste one precious minute. Throwing her heavy travelling coat and hat on a chair, she washed her hands and face, brushed her hair, requested Seraphine to give her a jersey and shady hat from one of the trunks, and was preparing to make her way down the stairs when she encountered Mrs. Cliuton-Tomkin, who peremptorily demanded where she was going. FIlm explained. "Only for half an hour, then, if you want me, I will return. There is a little green grassy path, zig-zaggiug up to a white gate and a mimosa tree. I do so want to see the other side of the gate----''1-1220	.s:; LNflyI--.1]) lileotyl:	"They will keep,'' said Mrs. Clinton-Tomidu, ''I want you to go to bed."	"To bed!" echoed Elfie in dismay, as she followed Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin back to her pretty bedroom, "hut why ? I'm not tired.''	"Yes, you are "cry tired. Seraphine" (the maid was unpacking) "put Miss Charrington into a wrapper, take down her hair, bring her some tea, not too strong, then lower the blinds, and leave her to rest till it is time to help her to dress for dinner. Now, my dear, crawl on to that nice plump white bed." She stood over Elfie.	"But-" Elfie (lid not know whether she wanted to laugh or to cry. To be treated so like a baby after her free and independent life "I'm not a scrap tired. I never felt less tired in my life and to go to that bed," she cast it a blighting look. ''I simply couldn't.''	''You must try.'' There was a rock-like quality in Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's tone and attitude new to Elfie. "Mv dear," the old lady placed a hand on the girl's shoulder, ''1 have not asked you to do anything distasteful to your wishes up to now, have I?""No, indeed." Sudden gratitude sprang to Elfie's heart.	"Well, then, can't you fall in with this-little whim of mine, if von like so to describe it, without further argumentTomorrow von shall be out the livelong day, you shall explore every grassy path and white gate and smell every mimosa tree in the neighbourhood if you will consent to rest this afternoon, and give me a promise not to leave this room till you descend to dinner."	"Very well." When Elfie capitulated she did so with a good grace. Submissively she allowed the pins to be removed from her hair, submissively she stuck her arms into the sleeves of a white wrapper, and like a docile child crawled on to the high bed. Ensconced there among the large, square pillows, she could not refrain from laughter. If Huniphry could but sec her I Humphrv, who had always enviously said she was the most ungoverned and independent creature in the world. 'When he, as a boy, had been made to do things, disagreeable, tiresome things, going to bed, getting up, attending church, learning his catechism, rubbing his muddy boots on mats, Elfin had more or less run wild, and had had a delightfully free and untrammelled existence And now, on a radiant afternoon, in a radiant new country, she was made to go to bed when she felt so fresh she could have run to the top of Portofino Kuhn and hack it was ridiculous, maddeningShe could not resist inquiring of Mrs. Clinton-Tomkimm if she, too, were going to bed.""No, it doesn't matter if I am seen-I mean if I do lookAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	227tired tonight, but for you-" with which unfinished observation the old lady left the roomii	In spite of her strong determination not to do so, Elfie fell asleep, and was awakened at six o'clock by the switching on of the electric light by Seraphine.	To her surprise, she saw spread out upon the couch the very prettiest of her many pretty frocks, a confection of the most diaphanous, delicate, spring-like green-the green of tender young leaves freshly opened by warm April sunshine. It was indeed a lovely gown, perfect in colour and texture, perfect in its fashioning. It had been an inspiration on the part of Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, and an artistic triumph of the dressmaker who had materialized it yet simplicity was its keynote.RIfle sat up and rubbed her eyes as her gaze fell upon it.	"I'm not going to wear that," she announced as she got down from the bed.Seraphine assured her she was."But who said so ? Did Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin ?""Yes, Mamzeile.""But," objected RIfle, "it's too much, I'm sure."	"Ton much F' Seraphine threw up surprised hands. "Don't you mean too leetle, Mamzelle ?""Too little I""It is decollete, is it not ?"	"Certainly," replied Elfie with dignity, "but not too much so. I saw to that. What I mean is, it's too grand."	Seraphine, who was conscious that time was slipping by, wasted no further words on what she regarded as a useless discussion and entreated RIfle to wash, and allow her hair to be "done". Mrs. Chnton-Tomkin had said Mamzelle was to he down in the lounge by a quarter past seven.	"Seven o'clock, you mean," corrected Elfie. "It says so here." She pointed to a card hanging against the wall on which were printed the hours of meals and other information.	Seraphine repeated her statement. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin had been most particular about the time.	"Very well. We shall miss the soup and fish, I suppose, but 1 don't care. I hate long dinners."	Silence supervened save for an occasional ecstatic note from Seraphine as she arranged and coaxed the soft luxuriant hair into a most artistic and yet perfectly simple coiffure. Elfie was too bored to talk. Such a waste of time she regarded it, all this fiddling and fnssation over hair which was accustomed228	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEto stopping up with a couple of hairpins. Seraphine was too deeply absorbed in her work. Seraphine was an artist, and had listened to, and approved of, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's Instructions: "Modish but not too smart, and with a cachet, a distinction of her own. Individuality in the dressing of her hair, in the fixing of her gown, in the arrangement of her flowers. Do you understand ?"	Now the frock was on, and fastened, and the flowers only remained to be fixed, and for the first time during the tedious hour, Elfie evinced an interest in the proceedings. Seraphine had produced a most exquisite spray of Mimosa, very full of blossom, very feathery and fluffy, and with a touch of genius had got it exactly in the right place against the white neck which rose slender and gleaming above the delicate green corsage.	"How lovely!" Elfie bent her head to inhale its delicate perfume. "Did you gather it from the tree up the little path which leads to a gate ?"	Seraphine shook her head. Madame (Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin) had given it to her. She did not know how, or from where, it had been procured, but it was very charming, was it not? Why I with Mamzelle's frock and hair and colouring it was ravishing. Would Mamzelle now regard herself in the long mirror, as she was finished ? With a gesture of pride, Seraphine swung the mirror into position.	Something stirred across the deeps of Elfie's memory as she surveyed her own reflection, and her heart beat a trifle rapidly while sudden colour dyed her white cheeks. She recalled the words of Brian Ingleby on that last unhappy evening: "You are dowdy, Elfle." Would he think her dowdy if he could see her now ? Would he neglect her ? Would he talk of her pityingly to Rosamond ? Would he, in fact, love herThoughtfully, almost surprisedly, her eyes rested upon her slim, green reflection. Could this be herself ? It seemed unbelievable. There was no vanity in her look, not a trace of self-appreciation. Indeed, to Scraphine, who watched her curiously, she seemed to wear an air triste and reminiscent. How strange and unemotional were these queer English people, the maid thought, how free from artificiality and coquetry! A French mademoiselle would now be jabbering with unconcealed delight over her ravishing appearance, while with skilful fingers readjusting a hairpin, pulling a little curl out here, patting one back there, or calling for rouge and powder puff to help out where Nature had fallen short. Whereas Elfie stood and gazed at herself, without, it seemed to Seraphine, any appreciable pleasure or pride in her own loveliness, and with just that brooding, reflective look on her face which came so near to sadness.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	229	"It is time, Mamzelle, time to go down; the clock has struck seven hours and a quarter."	"Has it ?" said Elfie. With a little sigh she passed out of the room, and down the stairs to Mrs. Clinton-Tnmkin. who was awaiting her.III	She stood at the threshold of the dining-room-whence streamed a buzz of conversation, a clinking of plates and glasses, a clatter of knives and forks wielded strongly and hungrily by foreigners, and a co-mingled odour of food, wine, and flowers-a little shyly. She wished that the train of Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's rose-coloured velvet gown was briefer and less like the tail of a fish, so that she could have moved more closely to her, and thereby gained some slight protection from the eyes of the room, for Mrs. Clintoa-Tomkin had most inconsiderately come to a dead stop to demand footstools from the head waiter, while she, Elfie, unable to advance a step because of the fish-tail train which barred her progress, and not daring to retreat, stood shrinkingly in the door-way, while devoutly wishing some cataclysm of nature would occur to swallow her up.	To Mrs. Ingleby and Brian, who from their table were amnzedly watching her, it seemed that spring itself, fresh, young, most lovely and sweetly shy, was peeping in, and at a breath might vanish. They could scarcely credit it was Elfie, for Humphry, who had arrived that day, had not informed them that she was coming. Humphry, indeed, was full of resentment that Brian should be in Portofino. Had Elfie known it, known that he was at this very hotelhe brooded in bitter jealousy. Mrs. Ingleby had invited him to join them at their table, and he could not well refuse, and now, with eyes fastened upon the girl, lie waited for her recognition of Brian but she did not yet look up, and it seemed to those who watched her that her sweet confusion arose from a consciousness of her own metamorphosis.	"It's amazing," said Mrs. Ingleby beneath her breath. "Not so much that she should be here, but the change in her; it's a transformation-a miracle 'Why, she's exquisite I Isn't she ?" She turned with excitement to Brian, but he made no reply; his heart was beating too clamorously for speech.	"Did you know she was coming ?" Mrs. Ingleby demanded of Humphry."Yes," he replied.'And that is why you are here ?"230	AN UNDRES5ET' HEROINEHe nodded. 'The old lady invited me. I needed a lieu-day." He was annoyed on reflection at his gratuitous explanation. It was nobody's business but his own why he came to Portofino.	"Ah, at last they are moving. That extraordinary looking creature is clever-they have been the cynosure of every eye, and I don't wonder at the old lady wanting to show her ofi.	She sees us-' Mrs. Inglehy, who had half risen, was nodding excitedly to Elfie, and the girl had come to a dead stop. For an instant she stood thus, staring almost blankly at the three familiar faces of her friends, while the colour drained away from her face and neck, leaving her as white as a magnolia, then recovering herself, and with a queer little jerky nod of recognition, she almost rushed after Mrs. ClintonTbmkin's rapidly retreating swishing train, and dropped into a chair which an obsequious waiter held for her.	It is regrettable that at this juncture of her career one is unable to report that Elfie drew herself up proudly, gave Brian a cool and indifferent look, hewed pleasantly to the other two, and passed with perfect composure to her seat, but truth will out ; ERie was not of the stuff of which stage heroines are composed. She was a creature of impulse and emotion. When she felt a thing, she felt it keenly, and could not pretend other'vise.	Brian, her one-time lover, was seated but a few tables away from her, staring at her, absorbing her; her own eyes were down, hut she was terribly conscious of his gaze. She trembled, and her wildly beating heart had sent the blood coursing hack to her cheeks, staining them a most lovely colour. Her nervousness, which was so manifest, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin would have dubbed gaucheness, stupidity, country bumpkiness in another girl, but in Elfie it simply made her more bewitching. The old lady gave a little pleased chuckle. She was so far more than satisfied with her evening's work. Now, wishing to put the girl at her ease, she talked airily of the dinner after examining the menu and wine list through her lorgnon, and discussed the fish course they had missed.	I don't regret it," she said; "indeed, that nice head waiter, who knew exactly the kind of footstool I wanted, not those rickety wooden things that suddenly leap up and hang your ankles, offered to bring the fish back, but I said, 'No, thank you.' I know what Mediterranean fish is-it consists of sharp spines held together by a soft gelatinous substance which looks like billsticker's paste, and is as tasteless as tripe without onions. The management usually gives it a grand name, and if you are inexperienced enough to venture upon it, you are lucky if you escape a violent death by choking. Now, I want you to have a glass of wine, and I will take no refusal tonight."AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	231She motioned to the waiter to fill Elfie's glass. 'It is sparkling hock, and will put new life into you. For some reason, unaccountable to me, you are nervous; it is not unbecoming, but I can't think why you are nervous. While I was parleying with the waiter about the footstools you stood in the doorway like a scared green butterfly, if there is such a thing, and I expected every moment to see you flutter away. There wasn't a person in the room who wasn't staring at you."	"That's just it," interrupted Elfie hotly. "I felt such a -such a fool. I couldn't advance because of your train-need it, ought it to he so long ?''	''It ought and must be.'' Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin laughed with keen enjoyment. She had long ago discovered Humphry and accorded him a pleasant recognition ; and the young, handsome man next to him, who was so obviously trying not to stare so outrageously at Blue, she knew must be Brianexcitement filled her veins. She was in for an interesting time, if she had never experienced one before. 'You must know," she continued, "that my immense train is one of my eccentricities. It gives me height, dignity, and lends a general impressiveness to my appearance, and, as you will observe, the salient characteristic of the one I am wearing is the violent contrast of its colour to the rest of my gown; rose and bright yellow together fairly hit you in the eye, if you will not be shocked at the slang expression. The wine has already done you good-let me see, this queer-looking word next on the menu means guinea-fowl, in reality ordinary poulet with salade; they may call it by a hundred different names, but in the end it always resolves itself into the same old poulet and salade. And now, if you dare venture to look up, my dear, your gloomy outspoken friend with the nice eyes, Mr. Doyle, is waiting to bow to you ; he is with two people, a good-looking, middle-aged woman and a handsome young man who have both been staring at you ever since we came into the room." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, raising her lorgnon (her keen old eyes could see far better without it), studied the Inglebys with interest."They are friends of mine,'' returned Elfie in a low voice''I've already recognized them.'' Studiously, and with eyes lowered, she crumbled some bread on the tablecloth till the waiter arrived with her portion of guinea-fowl. She was recovering her nerve, and her brain was Moving rapidly. Never for a moment did she suspect Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin of treachery, of being in an' way implicated in this unfortunate contretemps, for unfortunate, deadly, indeed, she regarded it. She had got over the blow of her broken marriage, or so she thought. She was beginning to learn to unlove Brian, as Mrs.	Clinton .'l'omk n had put	that afternoon in the Park	her232	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEmind was becoming more serene, her heart to ache less, life was taking on a new aspect, interests were accumulating, and now to knock up against him thus. . . She would rather have run a thousand miles. . . Fate was hard on her, she thought a little bitterly, it never left her in peace for long. And she had looked forward with such pleasure to this visitand there was the mimosa tree on the olive-clad hill, and the shining little bay which she had kept pausing to peep at while dressing, and the tall old irregular pink and blue and yellow houses forming such a bizarre and fascinating background to the semi-circular bit of a quay, a corner of which she could just catch from her window, and the very air full of magical scents and sounds. And now . . . absent-mindedly she drank another glass of wine ; her glass, unobserved by her, had been filled up again by the waiter. And now all was spoilt; a fly had entered the ointment. She could not run away, she could not abandon Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, and she 1 felt convinced the Inglebys would not leave. Why should they ? They were here first. Besides, Brian would not care, he never had eared. Why should he care now ? Her presence would be a matter of indifference to him once the embarrassment of their first meeting was over. But she would care; that was the awful part of the whole business. She would care; and it looked as though always she would go on caring. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's voice aroused her from her reverie, and it was full of reproach: "Three times have 1 addressed you, and I might have been speaking to a stuffed dummy. May I ask what is so engrossing your thoughts ?"	Elfie smiled apologetically. "I am sorry, what have you said to me	I inquired the names of your friends sitting with Mr. Doyle," said Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin coolly. She saw Elfie's perturbation, from the expression of her face she could guess all that was passing through her mind, and with a slight pricking of conscience and regret she had watched the gradual creeping of unhappiness to the girl's eyes and mouth. This must not be permitted (because she was a little ashamed Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin was all the more determined to brazen things out) ; Elfie must not behave like a silly schoolgirl, she must exhibit some pride, and she must be made to understand and appreciate her own value.	So to Elfie's almost inaudible reply that they were the Inglebys, Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin announced calmly that she had guessed as much.	"Why ?" inquired Elfie, there was something in the old lady's voice that caused her to look at her sharply.	"The young man's face, and restless eyes that cannot keep away from you ; and your face and downcast eyes andAN		UNDRESSED HEROINE	233droopy manner. You might be a moulting chicken. I should have thought you would have had more pride.""Pride What do you mean ?" asked Elfie heated].	"The quality, if you'd got it, that would prevent your wearing your heart upon your sleeve for his delectation. Do you know what I would do if I were in your shoes tonight, and what wouldn't I give to be in them ?-young, beautiful-" Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin, leaning across the table, touched Elfie lightly with her fan. "Have you any conception how lovely you are tonight ? No, I am not flattering you, yet I've no fear of turning your head; you are exquisite, and you ought to know that you are exquisite, and that at this moment you could do almost anything with any man, young or old, if you made up your mind to it. Why, that Mr. Ingleby-I've been watching him all through dinner-can't remove his eyes from you ; he's all aflame for you-"	"Oh, don't!" entreated Elfie; "don't say such things." Shame had seized her. That such matters should be so lightly discussed in a public dining-room-love, and all that love had meant to her I Her senses swam. She was unused to wine, the room was hot; try as she would she could not evade Brian's glance, that seemed to burn through and through her. "I have done with him for all time, as I have told you. It is only my clothes, these lovely things you have heaped upon me. He is surprised. I was so dowdy, you will recollect; that is what he called me. He knew me as a beggarmaid, and my transformation into a princess somewhat takes his breath away, that is all. Please do not speak of it again, and . . . Oh, when will this dinner come to an end ? Are we to sit here for ever and ever 1'	"No." Mrs. Clinton-Toinkin realized that she had gone far enough for tonight, that Elfie was at the end of her tether. She would take her for coffee to the handsome, bright, enclosed verandah, where she instinctively knew that everybody, save the elderly people who feared lurking draughts, would assemble, and there in a quiet corner give her a chance slowly to recover. She would permit her to be looked at by the two young men (and sundry others, she anticipated), but she should not be spoken to. "No--getting up from her seat-"we will not sit here for ever. Possibly you do not mean to he impolite to me," she said with a twinkle, "though it sounds uncommonly like it; but the room is hot, and as the dessert does not promise to be up to much we'll skip it and adjourn to the verandah. Are you coming ?"'Yes-no." Elfie got up and sat down again. 'Whatever's the matter	"I forgot your train was so long and that you moved so iowly. Forgive me, but I couldn't face it!'234	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"Move slowly! Good gracious I What next Do you want me to tear out of the room as though I'd entered for a quarter-mile flat-race 1' Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin simulated intense indignation. "It you're not coming, I'm going alone, so there l" Like a ship in full sail she moved majestically clown the room, and Elfie had perforce to follow in her wake.	When the head waiter, with a profound bow-in recompense br his ready response with stable and well-stuffed footstools a hall-crown had passed into his hand-had gently closed the door upon them, Brian turned to his mother and said, "You were right. She is a miracle."	"But I wasn't right. I spoke without thinking. Elfie is just the same herself. She was always lovely. It's her clothes that are the miracle. That hideous old lady must be a genius.""But look at her own clothes."	"She does that on purpose, I am sure--does, it to attract attention," said Mrs. Ingleby succinctly. "Don't you agree with me ?" She turned to Humphry.	He started. He had not been listening. His eyes had watched Eltie to the door, and his thoughts had followed her.	Mrs. Ingleby smiled. "You are wool-gathering, Humphry. But never mind. Finish your orange and we'll go for our coffee. I'm longing to get to Elfie, and to be introduced to that astonishing old lady, whom I'm sure I shall like. Are you coming too, Brian ?''	"Of course. Why not ?'' His tone was both surprised and aggrieved. "I'm most certainly coming."	They repaired to the verandah, only to find Mrs. ClintonTomkin seated alone. Ellie had vanished.	She had gone upstairs to fetch Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin a wrap, and a scarf for herself. She was unused to so bare a neck and arms, and the verandah was chilly. She was glad, too, of an excuse to slip away for a moment's respite from the inquisitorial gaze of the old lady below. She wanted breathingspace, time to rally her forces for the meeting with Brian, which she knew to be inevitable. She could not refuse to meet him, could not run away, must not, as Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin had suggested in scornful accents, behave like a silly schoolgirl.	But, if only the meeting need not he tonight! By tomorrow she would be calmer, more used to the idea; her pulses would be less rapid, her cheeks less hot. She was rummaging feverishly in one of the trunks for a scarf. She had already secured a wrap for Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin.	Seraphine entered and asked if she could be of any service. She found the scarf, and offered to carry the fur wrap, which was heavy, down to Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin.	"No," replied Elfie; then she stopped, an idea flashed through her brain. Why not ? Yes, Seraphine could takeAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	235it, arid she-she could disappear. Slip out into the cool	night, away from everybody .		\Vhy not ? There wasa moon. She could walk up the little path to the gate, andexplore what lay on the other side. She was never nervous,never afraid of the night.	Seraplune,'' she said hurriedly, ''will you give me a coatmy long, warm one ? I'm going out for a little while, the night is so lovely. You can take this to Mrs. Clinton-Tomkiii. If she inquires where I am, say I have a headache, and am resting and will be with her presently. it is"-for she unagined Seraphine looked at her suspiciously-,,the absolute trothmy head feels like a hot, woolly turnip.''''Woolly turnip ?'' said Seraplune, uncomprehendingly.	"Yes; a turnip is a round, white vegetable-hut you would not understand. Sufficient it is to say that my head requires rest and cool air, and Fin going to take it out to that sent up the hill''-leading Seraphine to the window, Elfie pointed out the seat, which was clearly discernible in the bright moonlight.''But,'' protested Seraphine, ''it will not he safe-''"Don't argue. I am going.""In France-Paris-no young ladies-"	''I am not in France or Paris, Seraphine. I am on the slope of a perfectly safe, quiet Italian mountain ; I could not he safer in a church."	Seraphine shrugged in shocked protest. She had heard of the extraordinary ways of English people but this-a beautiful young lady in a beautiful decollete gown wandering about at night on a mountain infested with stiletto-armed brigands, and catching her death of cold Elfie interrupted with a laugh. "1 will pin my dress-see!" She turned up the green, filmy draperies, and fastened them round her waist, pushed her silk-stockinged feet into a pair of walking shoes, and got into a long, white coat, the white fur collar of which she turned up about her bare throat. "Now," she said, "I am ready.''"But your head, Mamzelle ?" said Seraphine, still protesting.	"My head must be left to cool, and I must go at once or Mrs. Clinton-Tomkiu will he sending up for me. Seraphine, I want you to he kind and help me."	"Help you ? I have, Mamzehle, though I know it is most \veecked."Help me to get out. I can't leave the hotel by theverandah door, or I shall he seen. Is there any other exit.'[here must he one for servants and tradespeople."'There is a side door. I have been through it. But-'SShow it to me," commanded Elfie, and carrying the]nhappv Seraphine before her in the impetus of her enthn->ieni, e Ui "nee1 tNt l'N-ndeci the' 'tairs.236	AN UNDRESSED 1(EROINE	"But," began the	tip-	PO	worried maid again, as they tiptoed down a passage, 'supposing you are murdered--	"If my throat is cut, I will take the responsibility," said Elfie magnificently; "and do you happen to know the name of that big Saint Bernard I saw lying on the terrace when we arrived 1'"The dog, Mamzelle ?""Yes.""Bloc."	"You are a wonder, Seraphine; you know everythin Now for the door. Someone may come. Don't be stupi I insist-"	Seraphine capitulated, while wringing her hands, and Elfie passed out into the starlit night.	She crept round to the front of the hotel, and to the terrace which lay beyond the verandah, whisperingly coaxed the big, surprised dog to follow her, and took the path up the hill, to the white gate, and the seat near to the mimosa tree.	"How wonderfully and divinely beautiful I" she sighed in ecstasy as she sank down on to the seat, and drank in the tender and lovely scene spread before her-the harbour, some hundreds of feet below; the twinkling lights along the quay; the clustered fishing-boats at anchor silhouetted ebonhued against the moon-silvered water of the bay; the hills (also with twinkling lights from remote cottages and farmsteads) rolling up in soft, rounded, velvety masses to the sky; small friendly hills, as she discovered when she came to explore them later on, olive-clad, grass-clad, kindly, gentle, seductive hills, with an occasional gush of tinkling water; and a stray pergola of green vines and small, square, blue-washed cottages, with lace-makers sitting at their dainty work in the strong Italian sunshine; hills in their atmosphere of gentle placidity in no way resembling the great mass of Portofino KuIm, which reared its starry head behind her.	"I will not think," said Elfie; "I will just look, and look, and tell Bloc about it all. He doesn't know what is here, for he lives amongst it and accepts its beauty as a matter of course." Fondling the dog's big, soft head-he had nuzzled up against her-she sat in the perfect peace of the night till her fagged nerves became quiet, and her spirit soothed.	She had sat for some twenty minutes when she heard footsteps coming up the path behind her, and, turning round quickly, she saw the figure of a man approaching at a brisk speed. She got up with her hand on the dog's collar, feeling	little alarmed, notwithstanding her brave words to Seraphine. Standing thus in the moonlight, her white figure in strong relief against the dark trunk of the mimosa tree, she apparently startled the man who was advancing, as much as he hadAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	237startled her, for he came to a stop; then, clearly across the short intervening space, came a surprised ejaculation: "Why it's you, Elfie ? I am glad !" The voice was Brian's. He hurried towards her.	Her first impulse was to flee. Then she stood her ground she remembered Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin's admonition about pride and silly schoolgirl behaviour, and so forth, and she tingled with sudden courage."Good evening, Brian." she said, in a cool little voice,¥ 'what are you doing here P' She gave him her hand-a hand even cooler than her voice.	"What are you P' lie laughed; but she detected the nervousness beneath his airy manner, which had the effect of more than ever putting her at her ease."I came to take the air," she said.	"And I to see Peters, who is quartered in a cottage belonging to the hotel, at the end of this path round the crest of the hill."	"Peters I" she said in surprise. 'Do you mean your chauffeur P'	"I do. We brought the big car out with us. Mother has not been well of late. She does not like the two-seater, and doesn't trust my driving in this uncertain, mountainous country-says I am reckless. So we brought Peters and his little boy."	"Button ?" (What a stab to her heart and memory the old, familiar name evoked. It was she who had nicknamed him thus. He had been so like a round button mushroom as a baby.)	"Yes, Button. Peters has been in trouble lately; lost his wife, poor chap. So the mater would bring the small boy along too. There was no room in the hotel, and the proprietor got them fixed up here: an old peasant woman looks alter them. I'm oil my way there to tell Peters we shall require the car early tomorrow-we are going a long expeditionseveral of us. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin-what a jolly old lady she is !-is coming too." lie struck a match and lighted a cigarette, after asking her permission to smoke."Indeed P Well, I won't detain you. I was just going in."	'Oh, don't Elfie-won't you wait a minute P I-Iwell, it's such a stunning night, and I 'lout think you ought to walk back alone : it's not safe. If you'll just stay here, I shall be there and back from Peters in a jiffy. Please don't go. I've something most frightfully I want to say to you, that I've been wanting to say for months.''"It can't be very pressing if you've waited so long."	'Oh, I know T have given you cause to speak to me like hat.'' He came closer and bent over her.238	AN UNDRiLSSLD if EROiNE	"Like what ?" She was in no sense icy, merely politely interested.	''As though we were strangers, when I've known you nearly all my life. \Von't you sit down ?''	"Well?" She sat down aod folded her hands. Her gaze, he could see in the clear revealing moonlight, was beat upon the harbour below. Site looked grave and white, very aloof, and unspeakably lovely with the white fur collar of her coat thrown hack from her hare neck, and her (lark head rising like a flower from a slender stem. Brian looked at her, at the calm sweetness of her profile, the curve of her neck and slightly averted head, he looked at her longingly, and he felt he could have continued to look at her for ever. Something was stirring at his heart shame and a newborn passion for the girl, a passion that had sprung into sodden life as she stood so shyly in the doorway of the dining-room. Now it was devouring and white hot. His awakened senses had responded to the seductive beauty of the night; the faint distant wash of the sea, the whisper of olive leaves, the mysterious shadows created by the moonlight, the mimosa-scented air-all seemed to wrap them around in an atmosphere remote from the world-just the two of them. His tongue moved in a dry mouth. He could find no speech, no words to tell her of his shame for what he had done, of his hope that she might forgive him, of the love that had of a sodden filled his heart, of the now overwhelming desire within him to devote his life to her, for would she understand ? Would she believe him, ever forgive him, love him once again ? He paused on this ''love him on e again'', and his pulses quickened with sudden hope. Perhaps (she was so faithful by nature) her love for him, and he knew how great it had been, was still alive, had never died ! Joyfully, hopefully, he envisaged the idea. It was possible, it was even probable. Elfie, with her big, steadfast heart, was so entirely and magnificently above the common run of women, she was so fine, she was large enough to stoop to forgive, no, not even stoop, just forgive. His courage returned, he moved a little closer to her, words were trembling on his tongue when she turned and confronted him with calm, grave eyes. "Well," she said, "I am waiting to hear what you have to say to me, Brian, that is so important. Will you be quick. Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin will be getting anxious about me.""Oh," he cried, "don't worry about her when I am here."She looked at him, her eyebrows uplifted in surprise.	"I am afraid your being here will not affect her anxiety one wky or the other.""I didn't mean that, you know, Elfie.""Then I've riot the faintest conception what you do mean."A N		N	F F S S 1. 1)	It I. F 0 1 N I.	'Rifle,'' he pleaded, '(10 not speak in that distant tone. \\hat I meant was that you and I, just the two of us, just as we used to be in the old dear days, are quite alone in this wondrous night.''That is obvious,'' she returned lightly.He made a gesture of despair. ''Oh, won't you understandL am tr big to tell you of my shame and sorrow for the wayI	hurt you and let on go to ask your forgiveness.'' Helook her unresisting hand and held it fast in both his own,'1 loved you really, and I know now that I've always lovedvito. I've never thought of anyone else, never eared for	i vone else. You thought I would omarry Ifosamond. Once---j am frank, you see-[ thought myself I might but never.lla're can never be another woman in the world as long as iteontams you. There is only one Rifle-' he bent over her,	v'.'hing her eyes,aiid she drew away from him not atfrightedly, hut with the assured confidence of a woman who knows how to keep a man at arm's length, and has perfect control of her own feelings-''Only one beloved Elf of the woods. I thought I could (10 without her, live my life shorn of her companionship, but I found I can't.''	''And it has taken you ten months to make this discovery 1' she asked quietly. She had withdrawn her hand from his and was sitting up very straight, her eves again on the sea, so the scorn and bitterness of their expression were hidden from him.	''I din not think you would listen to me. I tried, you know, to see you I wrote to you, but you did not reply.''	"You tried to see me once, and you wrote to me once. I lad you felt for me all that you say, discovered that you	issessed this great and unalterable affection for me, surely it would have been worth a little more P'rsevcrance.'' She spoke so gently, so almost humouriogly, that again he failed to detect the irony beneath her words. 1-lc would no more have suspected Rifle of irony than his mother of untruthI oltiess. Brian had never ls'i'n perspicacious.''You were away down in Surrey.''''ilumphiry came to see me there-it takes but an hour1; 0-.1-1 Waterloo.'"With II untpltrv you had no quarrel.'''That is true,'' she agreed.	''Then, how could I apprehend that you would listen to nie P"What led you to think I might tonight ?''	''My own tremendous love for you. I felt it must and should break down all harriers between us. I coni preheadc'd is you stood in the doorway that I must have always h veil you, and that such vital by' as tiiiee could tint lii' (1(i']' il. 1240	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEmarvelled to myself that I had ever let you go, ever permitted you to slip through my fingers, one so sweet, so charming, so exquisite! Elfie, have you any idea how you looked as you stood in the doorway ; shy, confused, 1 believe, at your own beauty in that lovely green, shimmering frock ? Where did you get it from ? It might have been composed of delicate beetles' wings-you know, those beautiful little green chaps-I rubbed my eyes. 'Is it a fairy, or a wood-elf ?' I wondered.	I could scarcely believe it was you . 	Again he movedclose to her. "Elfie, won't you say that you will forgive me	soon . . . at once. I feel I cannot wait. 1 love you so,adore you . . . Elfie," his breath was on her cheek, his armswere closing about her, his lips near to hers, he was assuredthat victory would be his; and then she spoke, then she letherself go, and poured upon him the scorn which had beengathering within her at his words. An hour ago she hadbelieved she still cared for him ; in the last five minutes her lovehad been killed utterly and for all time. In a blinding flashof realization of what he really was, she saw him stripped bareof the lovable qualities her glamoured senses had bestowed uponhim. She despised and pitied mm in the same breath, despisedhim for his mendacity (if he had truly loved her as he declaredhe had all these long months, could he have kept away fromher ?), pitied him for being so poor a thing.	"Do you know," she queried, and the irony in her voice was very hitter, "that you are making love to my clothes ?"He started. "Your clothes? What do you mean ?"	She laughed, and it was a hard little laugh. She was standing in front of him, looking into his eyes, with an amused quizzical expression in her own. "My frock-how did you call it ?-my lovely beetle-wings frock. I am smart tonight, no longer a dowdy thing in-what was it? dingy brown or unbecoming grey ? I am in a gown that suits me and that has enhanced what few attractions I may possess. Your eyes are dazzled. What you are asking to be your wife is not ins, but merely my fine feathers. I myself, beneath them, am just the same as I ever was, except perhaps a little harder, and th4t self you never really loved, and do not really love now. It's my frock that's bewitched your senses.""Stop," he cried, "it N not true."	"It is true, horribly and depressingly true, and hurting to one's pride to know that in so brief a space as a couple of hours a pretty frock has done more to gain what you call love than 1 could achieve in all the long years, Brian. Do you not realize that it is somebody else who has been busy with the adornment of my person and not I ? Neither my gifts nor my interests lie that way. Left to myself, I should relapse into my old dowdiness. I s)'ould fight against it, forAN		aNDRILSSEU	1iLRUJNE	241I begin to appreciate the fact that the successful dressing of one's body seems to afford great pleasure to those who care for us, but I'm afraid 1 should not succeed. I should begrudge the time expended, for to be really well turned out, and 1 know it to my sorrow, means hours spent belore a mirror. Do you not realize that if I were so foolish as to believe in you and to marry you, the same old Lihr' would inevitably reappear then where would be your love In dust and ashes at my unsmart feet ?'''It's a lie," he said huskily.	She shook her head. "No, 1 can see now as I never saw before. A mist seems to have been dissipated that hitherto	hscured my vision, and in its place divination has come as clear as the noonday sun. I can look ahead through the \ears I see myself middle-aged, faded, old. Could such en affection as yours, as light and unstable as dry sand on a seashore, withstand the test of middle-age in your wifethe most unattractive period in a woman's life, for old age is frequently beautiful, but middle-age rarely ? It could not. My soul might still be young, it might even have gained ingrace, the real me might be a finer and better thing at lofty-five than it is at twenty-two. I pray that it may he so,otherwise age has no compensation whatever, but to this youwould be indifferent.""Elfie, you are hard."	"I am being kinder to you, Brian, than I have ever been in my life, if you did but know it, for I am saving you from yourself." Her voice was softer now. "And now, good night. No, don't come with me, and don't say any more. Please believe me that this is my final word. I am sorry if you are unhappy tonight, for I myself have been in abysmal depths of wretchedness, and am only just emerging to the tops of the cliffs and finding once more sweet revivifying air and sunshine, so I can afford to be sorry for others. And this-phase will pass"-she looked up at him with frank and kindly eyes-' 'and, if you wish it, we can always be friends.''	'Then you do not wish me to leave the place ?" he inquired eagerly.	"By no means, so long as you accept this decision of mine as unalterable."	He waited before replying, he dragged his gaze away from her face, so bewitching in its framing of soft white fur, and 4ared depressedly at the sea below. Faint sounds of life were borne up to them from the harbour and a woman's voice singing ''La Donna  mobile''. The soft wind stirred the feather pendant plumes of mimosa above their heads, the olives whispered their mysterious secrets one to another, Bloc, impatient to he moving, made a whinine little noise.242	aN UNIiRES5EI) HEROINE	Elfie watched the man she had once so worshipped with a curious detachment. She was sorry that he suffered, but she regarded him in the same way as a nurse regards a patient after an operation, momentarily the pain was sharp, she knew, but it would pass, there was that consolation. More engaged was she in reviewing her own new sensation of freedom. She felt as though shackles which had been binding her down for months had been rent asunder her love for Brian was dead, and she was without a single regret for its passing. She was a free creature once again, and she was happier than she had been for months. Unconsciously she stretched out her arms, as though wishful of winging her way down the side of the mountain, and Brian, turning, saw the movement.	"What is it ?'' he cried, in sudden hope. Was she extending those white arms to him	"Oh !'' she laughed, "that I were a bird and could fly away over the mountains and see what is beyond . . . I believe I should find blue liepaticas growing amidst the snow andShe stopped. Brian was staring at her in bewilderment. ''And I must really go now. Good-bye.''	He watched her flit down the little winding path, a white glimmering thing in the moonlight, till she was lost to view, then with a hand that shook he filled and lighted a pipe, and for long he sat and smoked. He knew that her decision was irrevocable, for she had not even waited for his reply.CHAPTER IVIN WHICH MRS. CLINTON-TOMKIN ASKS A STRAIGHT QUESTIONAND IS SOMEWHAT ASTONISHED AT THE REPLYA WEEK later Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin and Elfie were taking their tea (in reality coffee) at the Caf Rolando on the quay. Caf Giovanni, which practically rubbed shoulders with Caf Rolando, the dimensions of the quay being circumscribed, was larger, smarter, and much more up-to-date in the matter of fancy tablecloths, flowers, nickel spoons (instead of boric) for mustards and salts, than was Caf Rolando, and therefore attracted by far the greater number of visitors who drove from Santa Marg-herita or 1fapdlo, but for reasons known to themselves Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin and Elfie preferred Caf Rolando.AN UNDRESSED hEROINE	243	it's more Italian," remarked Elfie, "and I like the nice girl with the wonderful Venetian-red hair.''	''And we get away from the English visitors,'' Pronounced Mrs. Clinf:ou-Tomkin, ''and the Americans with their outrageous adjectives.''	''I just heard one shriek out that the dear yellow church -how nice it looks against that opalescent sky this afternoon -was real dandy.''	''1 know ; monstrous I'' The old lad)' vehemently stirred her foamy coffee, and wondered if Elfie, with the aid of her Italian Primer, could secure another twist)- roil, and a fresh supply of butter. ''Never have I encountered two foreigners with less knowledge of a few simple everyday English words than the red-haired girl and her smiling mamma they don't deserve to get on."	''But we haven't a smattering of simple Italian words," laughed Elfie.	"We don't run a caf. By this time they ought to have learnt that English people's first demand when indulging in afternoon tea is for bread and butter, or roll and butter, or toast and butter something with butter before starting on these indigestible but quite fascinating cakes, and when just now we asked for the commodity the girl looked as bewildered as if we had called for a dolphin. Do you know the Italian for butter ?''	"I do," replied Elfie, and she ordered it without a reference to her Primer.	"I cannot think why I am enjoying all this so much," observed Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin presently whilst waving her hand towards the water gently lapping the slope of the little beach, and the lace-makers and menders of nets seated iii the shade of some fishing-boats lying prone on the warm, dry stones ; and the tall, pale pink and metallic blue and cream)' white houses-from whose windows gay-coloured washing hung drying in the sun, while a little (lark boy with brilliant black eyes, and garments which consisted of a series of yinvning gaps held together by some strips of orange rag, was prodigiously busy with a wheelbarrow three times his own size. ''I cannot conceive why 1 am not bored. Accustomed as I am abroad to gay crowds, casinos, concerts, restaurant luncheon parties, hands, operas, I find it quite incomprehensible why I am liking this so much, and not ready to burst into tears with ennui.''	''But you couldn't,'' said Elfie. ''You might perhaps weep at the idea of leaving it, but from no other cause."''You like it, too ?"	''Shall I tell y'on what I feel about Portofino, and I will try' to be restrained ? It seems to me,'' Elfie put clown the244	AN UNDRESSED HEROINElittle nut-encrusted cake she was eating and gazed dreamily at the sliming water of the harbour and at a small motorboat which was fussily returning from Frutuoso, 'that when God had finished making the world there were some bits of paint left over on the palette from sea and sky and flowers and children's eyes, and He said, 'These cannot be wasted, so I will make Portofino,' and He made Portofino. He filled its little harbour with the bluest and most translucent water conceivable, and framed it on one side with rounded gentle hills and a little yellow church on the other side He grouped adorable pink and blue houses which leaned confidingly one against the other, and whose very windows seemed to laugh at the sunshine and brightness and jollity of everything around. And to the east He put little old tumbledown shops, dark within, and full of garlic and globe artichokes, figs, and nutty cakes, rolls as long as an umbrella, and as twisty as a corkscrew, coffee beans roasting in braziers and queer-looking cheeses made from goats' milk, and all set so near to the edge of the quay that one holds one's breath for fear they'll go slipping into the water and be lost. Then He filled the valleys which lay between the ridges of the great Portofino Kuim in the reai with violets, carpets of them, and primroses, clumps as big as a tea-tray, and that's how I like my primroses, on banks near running water in the cool shade of olives and fairywhite cherry-blossom. Then, as I hoped to find when first I came, He did not forget to plant hepaticas in the mountain fissures where the snow lies in tiny half-inch drifts and from their white world they peep with sunny laughing eyes. And a lot more God made which would take too long to tell you, but when He had finished He saw that Portofino was good.""Really!" said Mrs. Clinton-Tomkmii.Elfie nodded, and resumed the eating of tier nutty cake.	The old lady looked at the girl, at her cheeks flushed by the sun, her eyes dancing, and absorbing every object and every movement of the life of the busy little quay, her lips smiling over the efforts of the small picturesque ragamuffin with the immense wheelbarrow. Nothing seemed to escape her eager attention. She was manifestly enjoying Portofino to the full. And her voice just now as she talked had been so vibrant, her laugh so contented, her whole manner so full of animation, that Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin fell to wondering	Presently, without any beating about the bush, she put a very direct question "And how, my dear, is your and Mr. Ingleby's affair progressing ?"	"Progressing !" Elfie left the orange-tattered boy and turned startled eyes upon her interlocutor "It isn't progressing at all. I thought you knew.''AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	245	"I only know that Mr. Ingleby is very much in your society, and is very palpably in love."	"That may be, but the affair, as you describe it, is more off than it ever was; and always will be."	"May I inquire, or will you think me impertinent, if he has proposed to you again ?""He has I"	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin started, and an exclamation escaped her. She had come to Portofino for this, yet she had not known nor been told of it."When ?""The night we came.""Good gracious I That was rapid.""Yes."	"And you? No wonder you're brighter and gayer than I've ever seen you," the old lady was considerably excited."But I refused him.""What?""Yes; that is why I'm brighter and-so gay.""Explain." Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin was unequal to more.	And Elfie did so; and when she had finished Mrs. ClintonTomkin murmured: "There are more things in Heaven and	Earth 	and went on muttering to herself confusedgrumbling and incoherent sounds-sounds so peculiar thata cat, which had crept across from Caf Giovanni and wasabout to jump on the chair next to the old lady, afirightedlydecided it wouldn't, and returned to its own quarters.Rifle burst out laughing. "Why are you so astonished ?""I thought you still cared for the man¥		"I did.""And it's simply a case of the past tense ?""Yes, absolutely.""But why? What has made you change ?""His asking me to marry him."	Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin breathed stertorously, and closed her eyes. She gave it up. Such complexities were too strenuous for her to attempt their unravelment on so warm an afternoon.	Elfie laughed again. Leaning forward she said: "I want you to consider three points in the case judicially, impartially.""Well ?"	"Firstly, Brian broke oft our engagement-for virtually it was he who did so-which proved he did not care for me.' She ticked this off on her first finger. "Secondly, save for one slight effort he made to see me, and one short letter in which he blamed me for being exacting and impulsive, he eittirelv ignored toe for nearly eleven months. Thirdly, we246	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEmet, or rather saw each other, in a public dining-room; a couple of hours later, after the exchange of about a dozen sentences relating to his chauffeur and the chauffeur's small boy, he imparts to me the pleasing information he adores me, always has adored me, and always will adore me. Can you explain this sudden and amazing change of front ?"	"Easily," replied Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin with calmness, "the equally amazing change in your appearance."	'Exactly," said ERie in triumph. "He fell in love with my gown and not with me.''Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin looked at her with amused pity.	"You are younger and more stupid than I thought," said she. "Have I not told you this is man's attitude towards women ?""It is not an attitude that suits me," returned Elfie. "Doyou know these lines from The Taming of the Shrew ?-myfather often used to quote them'Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks; Shall win my love I'	"No man before marriage loves that way," pronounced Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin.	"Pardon me, I know of one. To prove that it is possible I will tell you something I overheard as I was passing the smoking-room on my way to bed the night of our arrival. The door was open, I caught my name, and I stopped, It did not strike me till afterwards that I had been guilty of listening ; I was ashamed, yet I did not regret it. It was Brian who was speaking, lie was commenting upon my changed appearance to Humphry ; apparently they were alone in the room."'Changed!' said Humphry, 'in what way P	'You don't mean to say,' Brian sounded almost too astonished to continue, 'that you don't see how extraordinarily she's improved ? Why, she's grown lovely, so exquisitely dressed, so smart, I scarcely knew her.'	'No,' replied Homphry, 'I see no difference. She always looks exactly the same to inc-that is the beauty of Elfie, she always is the samo !' " ERie paused and watched a whitesailed boat rounding the promontory, a nice little boat skilfully steered. Hnmphry, she knew, was the helmsman he had asked her to go for a sail with him, but Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin had needed her. "I went on to bed with a warm little feeling in my heart," RIfle blushed at her words, for she saw that Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin had instantly misconstrued them.	"Of course, if you're going to marry Mr. Doyle," said the old lady getting up.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	247	"I never said that," flashed Elfie. "I've not the slightest intention of marrying Mr. Doyle. Can't a girl have a friend- ?''	"Not a man like that,' said Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin sapiently. "Will you ask the red-haired girl how much we owe? No girl could be on purely friendly terms with a man who is as much in love as Mr. Doyle apparently is with you. Or if the girl could, the man couldn't."	"What objection have you to Humphry ?' queried Elfie, as they took their way along the quay.	"Objection! I haven't any. Did 1 say I had? As a matter of fact I prefer him to Mr. Tnglcby. FTc has nicer manners towards elderly people. Now, will you lead me to one of your violet-carpeted valleys i I fancy violets ; that coffee and our talk has made me feel apoplectic. You-rather take it out of me."'I am sorry.''	"Don't mention it. I prefer it to dullness," said Mrs. Clinton-Tomkin.CHAPTER VIN WHICH ELFIE DISCOVERS THAT HUMPHRY ISFINER THAN SHEELFIE was preparing for bed. Seraphine was brushing out her tangle of hair and wishing there were fewer knots in it. Seraphine was tired, the hour was late (Effie had been with Mrs. Ingleby, who was still far from well, in her room, and had remained chatting, the affection between them being as warm as of old), yet Seraphine talked, She was an erorinons talker and a cumulative one. Had she perforce to be silent, for ever so brief a period, she saved up her conversation to discharge like a Maxim gun later on, Tonight she had waited for Elfie for over an hour, now it was half past eleven. She was tired, yet she babbled like a stream. This garrulity did not worry Elfie, who had merely to listen with but half an ear, and an occasional punctuation of a "Yes" or "No" or "Indeed", which quite contented Seraphine, but tonight, through the tangled maze of her loquacity, Elfie suddenly caught a name which arrested her attention.	"Button!" she exclaimed "The chauffeur's little boy 1 What did you av. Seraphine 2 That he was ill I''24b	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"Yes, Mainzelle, vary ill. That Booton-I think he will die."	"Die!" Elfie pushed the brush away from her, and, turning about, looked at Seraphine. "What is the matter ?"	"Small-how do you call it? A most dreadful thing, makes little holes in your skin."''Smallpox ?''	"Yes, that is t; and he is vary, vary ill, and no nurse, and the old peasant woman she have run away in terror, and Monsieur Peters, that chauffeur, the poor, poor father, is 'cartbroken and so fatigue, worn out, Beeflu say, with nobody help him nurse the poor petit Booton. The nurse who was to come from Rapollo this afternoon, she did not come, why I do not know, and the doctor he said-"	"Stop, Seraphine." Bide sprang up. "Do you mean Peters is all alone with his little boy in that cottage ?"	"Yes, Mamzelle, for two days he 'ave been alone; the hotel servants they are too frightened, and Mr. Ingleby say his mother must not be told or she would go---""But Mr. Ingleby ?""He has gone to bed. I saw him," said Seraphine laconically.	Elfie began to wind up her hair and push in the hairpins. Seraphine, with round, startled eyes, watched her,"What is Mamzelle going to do ?" she asked aifrightedly."I-I am going to Button."	"To Booton I" Horror crept to Seraphine's face. "But it would be madness, Mamzelle. Smallpox! A disease most 'orrihle.''	"Yes-1 know, but ..' Bide paused, arrested by Scraphinc's exclamation. Suddenly she felt-and to her own shame and dismay, and almost for the first time in her life-a sensation of fear and dread. Her hands fell to her sides, and she stood staring at her own white reflection in the mirror before her .... A disease most horrible Smallpox! She had had a curious repulsion towards diesase, infectious disease, throughout her life . . - and smallpox! As Seraphine said, smallpox was horrible. And she knew nothing of its treatment, of the nursing of it, or what should be done. She had had no experience. She might be in the way. She would be in the way, for of what use would she be when she was-frightened ? Yes, she had to admit that to herself. She was ashamed of it, but she could not help it.She felt her limbs tremble, she knew that her face was ashen, ter:or had her in its grip. Nerveless, she dropped into a chair. She looked at Seraphine with wide, fearful eyes, and she tried to smile, but her twitching lips turned it into but a travesty of one."Mamzelle is not well ?" cried SeraphineAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	249	Elite shook her head. "I-I am only upset at your news. I have known Button since he was a baby And you think he is dying, Seraphine ?"	"Perhaps not." Seraphine was more guarded now. She had apprehended what Elfie's first impulse had been, and was thankful when she saw her collapse, shaken and trembling into the chair. The madness had passed, sanity had returned, quickly she must remove the hairpins once more, and the white wrapper, and hurry her young mistress into bed."But you said he was dying I"	"Perhaps I but exaggerated a leetle, Mamzelle. 1 'eard he was-what do you call it, deleerious, and callin', callin' all the time, and the poor Peters weeping.-	"Don't , Seraphine." Elite put her fingers to her cars, she could bear no more. "Leave me, 1 will finish alone.'	So Seraphine left her and, after kneeling and saying a hurried prayer with her thoughts away in the olive grove with the distracted father and sick child, Elfie crept into bed.11	She lay with eyes staring at the window. The moon had waned-moons will not last for ever (they had been a fortnight at Portofino)-and it was dark, very dark. Had she decided to go she could not have found her way, she thought, along that narrow circuitous path, and it would not have been very saf, it was nearly midnight. It would have been rash, stupid I And, supposing she had had the luck to arrive at the cottage in safety, what could she have done? . . . Nothing! Nothing, that is to say, for the poor little delirious Button. What can you do for a patient who is off his head	Peters, her presence might have helped through the long anxious hours, human sympathy does help, and he had no wik. Button's mother was dead. But still . . . Uneasily Elfie turned from one side of the bed to another, burying her face in the pillows, trying to stifle thought, conscience, and to shut out the black, black night, which seemed to her distraught fancy to be staring in with evil, mocking eyes. "Still he is not my chauffeur, he is Brian's, and Brian has gone to bed!" Then she fell to wondering why the nurse had failed. Nurses had no right to fail, it was a nurse's duty always to come up to the scratch. But as she had failed, why hadn't the doctor procured one from somewhere else? Why hadn't he immediately wired to Genoa ? It was his plain duty. If Button died (she slurred over this quickly; she could not picture the little round Button of a mushroom dead), murder would be at his door. Possibly he wa Italian and could not make250	AN UNDRESSED HEROINEhimself understood possibly he gave Peters directions and Peters did not understand ; possibly by this time a nurse had arrived. .Seraphine might be mistaken. She brightened, but momentarily. No, Seraphine had declared she had just had it from Biffen. Biifen was reliable, never exaggerated) and was unemotional as a mahogany sideboard.	Again she turned restlessly) and, raising her head Irom the pillow, stared defiantly at the black face of night, still mocking her from the window. But as she looked a strange thing happened-it seemed to her the blackness was dissipating, not suddenly, but slowly, rolling, ebbing away like liquid ink to either side of the window, leaving a luminous space and into this space (now she sat up elbow on pillow) appeared a face, beautiful, happy, serene, and with eyes and lips that seemed to be beckoning to her, encouraging her, smiling at her and it was the face of her father. Then slowly it disappeared.	"Oh," she cried, "it is but a vision,' but she was already out of bed. "I will, Father. I will be quick. I do know the path. I was lying I could thread my way along it blindfolded."	She switched on the light. In a couple of minutes she was ready. She did not pause to put on a dress, but slipped into a white wrapper and a long warm coat. Cautiously she opened her door, crept down the stairs-the place was in darkness tiptoed along the passage to the side door-she knew there would be fewer bolts and bars there to manipulate -and passed out into the night.	She struck the path tip the hill unerringly, and sped along, her coat brushing the scented grass and tiny procumhent flowers. Half-way up, her heart seemed to leap into her mouth, she heard stealthy steps behind her, and a shadow loomed out of the darkness but it was only Bloc, who nuzzled his big head into her hand.'	she whispered, glad to have him there, "whenwe get through the white gate I ant a little uncertain of thepath to the cottage we round the crest of the hill to theolive grove, but there are two paths. Lead the way." AndBloc, who had been many times to the old peasant woman'scottage, took her there with canine intuition.	A light glimmered through the dense foliage 01 the olive trees, from one of the small windows of the cottage. It was but a low wattle-thatched little shanty of three rooms, and with no upper stores'. The window front which the light shone was nncurtained. Creeping up to it, Elfle peeped in. Then-she held her breath and her heart. Huntphrs sat within, holding Button in his arms. Both had fallen asl'pFor long she gazed, fascinated, moved-h ads tlioitl' .i.AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	251did not know it, were coursing down her cheeks-deeply ashamed. This man whom once she had called to his face the most selfish person in the world had outstripped her. He had risen to heights while her trembling feet were but haltingly picking their way up the first slopes of the valley.	'Oh,'' she murmured brokenly, ''and 1 said 1/ia! to him. I who nearly did not come Yet there was no claim upon him, not a vestige ; he had never known or played with the little Button."	She noticed with a pang that his face was tired and sad. Black shadows were beneath his eyes, dark steady eyes that had ever looked at her so kindly, and his mouth, doggedlooking when awake, looked old for so young a man.	A keen desire of a sudden filled her heart to help to remove that look of age and sadness from his face, to cheer him, to comfort him, and to tell him how splendid she thought lie was, and to ask his forgiveness for her hard words. Also, and now she trembled, as he was asleep she felt she would like to kiss him, only as a sister kisses a brother, or even a mother a son for she believed in those first moments of awakening that her love contained no passion, and her trembling limbs and beating heart left her without realization of their meaning.	The moments passed, and still she stood, a tense white figure, her gaze riveted upon the two who slept so peacefully within, till Bloc, who was becoming restless, made a little whining sound then, opening the door softly, she crept into the room.'Ii	Humphry awoke to find her kneeling in front of him, her dark head thrown back, her eyes looking into his."Elfie"Hush," she breathed, finger to lips.	"He will not wake, he is better." He looked at her in bewilderment. "Is this a dream ? I was dreaming of you, Elfie. I dreamt that you fluttered in . . . like a white moth and dropped a kiss upon my forehead . . . . Of course, it was a dream, all things pleasant in my life have been but dreams." He spoke querulously-she saw that he was but half awake."It was no dream," she returned gently.	He started, then, remembering the child in his arms, he became rigid again, in the dim light of a small oil iamg he might, with his head thrust forward above the boy, have been one of Rodin's statues, a figure of haunting melancholy.252	AN UNDRESSED HEROINE	"Is it really true that you are here ? You will not fade away ?""Yes, it is true. I have come to help you with Button."	Again he started and with violence, and again he remembered the sleeping boy. Now the tangle in his tired brain had straightened out. He was awake, very keenly awake, and alarmed for her and her safety.	"Impossible! You must go at once, this instant. Do you know what the boy is suffering from ?-" He checked himself. She must not be told, she would be terrified. "He -he has been very ill, has been delirious, he is better now, but it might return-the delirium, it would alarm you-Elfie, I beseech you to go-Peters is asleep in the next room if I want him-''	"I know what is the matter," she interrupted quietly, "and I refuse to go. I have been kneeling here, close to you both, long enough to have caught the disease if I am to catch it, but I have no fear, and it would be useless to turn me out now. I was frightened at first, and I would not come. Then something impelled me to get out of bed; it seemed to me that my father was at the window, beckoning to me, urging me to go to Button, and not to be a coward. So I came, and it was to find you here first. Humphry, can you ever forgive me"Forgive you ! For what, and why are you kneeling ?"	"Because I am ashamed. Once I told you you were the most selfish 'nan in the world. And-I find you with Button in your arms."	"That is nothing," he said roughly. "Elfie, get up. I-I cannot move to offer you a chair; please - ."Not till you say that my cruel words are forgotten."He shook his head- "I can never say that."	She drooped before him, and he saw that her lips trembled pitifully. "You are hard," she murmured, "but I deserve it."	"Oh, don't"; with an effort he controlled himself for the sake of the child. "To talk of forgiveness to you, you who are	the very breath of my life . 	And you kneel before me,making me feel, forgive me, the most d- blighted fool,Elfie, and ask me to forget words that have helped me morethan anything else in my life to try to be-well, to be differentfrom what I was. I won't forget them, because I don't wantto forget them. So there I" He looked at her combatively,and she smiled through her tears at his wrath. "Have youanything else to say to me"I had, but you make it hard, it is so obvious you wish me	to go 	she faltered.	"Great God I" he crjed. "Is smallpox a thing to be played with? Wish you to go! Elfie, sometimes you are cruelAN UNDRESSED HEROINE	253You do not mean it, because you do not understand . . . do not understand the mortal craving a man may have for the woman he loves. Why, just now, when I was dreaming of you, dreamt of that fluttering kiss which moth-like you dropped upon my forehead--	"It was no dream," she murmured low, and though she shook and a tide of scarlet rushed to her cheeks, she looked at him with brave eyes.	There was a long, long silence, while the import of her words slowly drifted through his starved being and reached his tired heart and brain and settled there, and even then he lingered on it, as one lingers over something very lovely and precious, scarcely daring to speak or breathe for fear that it may vanish."Is it true ?"She nodded.	"You kissed me 1' He was determined there should be no mistake."Yes," she said.	Again he dwelt upon it, while with his head pushed forward above the small figure in his arms he searched her face."What does it mean ?" he asked at length.	"What you like to make of it, Humphry." Her voice was but a whisper, but he caught the words, and his mind, now as keen as a razor edge, snatched at their meaning."That you love me	She hesitated. "Not, I think, as you deserve to be loved, but as I hope and believe I shall learn to love you some day. For what is love ?" She smiled at him tremulously and very tenderly, for the light that had flashed to his face, irradiating every haggard feature, had touched her inexpressibly-how he must have suffered! "I thought that I loved Brian, and my love died in an instant. I believed I did not love you, and just now when I watched you through the window, it seemed to be born in a moment. Is that love ?""Yes," he replied promptly.She gave a happy little laugh. "You think so I""I'm sure of it.""So-" said she."Yes"I-am willing-but I think you ought to finish," and hereyelids drooped."You are willing to marry me, beloved one 1"	She nodded, and with eyes still bent upon the ground awaited his outburst of happiness, but only silence followed. Presently, looking up, she found that he was unable to speaks254	AN	UNDRESSED hEROINEfor he was wrestling with his own emotion. Just because lie was a very tired man the sudden and unexpected joy had been too much for him.'Let me take the child," she urged.He shook his head."Let me do something."	"There is nothing to do. Just stay there, Elfie, in that position if you are not tired'' (she still knelt before him), "and let me-absorb you," he muttered. "In that white thing slipping from your shoulders you look so lovely, a white rose, and just as sweet and pure."And she knelt on to please him.	After a while whimsically he complained of the hardness of things.In what respect ?'' she inquired, surprised.	''That my arms should he so occupied. For this, for you, 1 have waited for thousands of hours and days and months and 'ears, and now they are filled with a wisp of humanity named Button. You must admit it's rough on a chap.''	"There are many hours and days before us, please God," replied Elfie demurely."And in the meantime there are other ways," suggested he."Other ways ?"	"You have a pair of arms, nice white ones, beneath the sleeves of your coat."	She smiled and blushed. "What do you want me to do with them ?''	"Don't you know, or are you too dense ?" he whispered pleadingly. "You should be kind and understand, Sweetheart, when I-I am so occupied. It is not fair. You said you wanted to help."	She rose and, stealing behind him, softly laid her bare arms about his neck, and he, tilting his head backward, sought and found her lips.THE ENDMADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE ANCHOR REED. lIt., nEThER, ESSEX.