<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
These images produced somewhat poorer quality results, primarily due to curvature of the text at the edge of the page. 

There is some very minor garbling throughout, and some pages have suffered the loss of text along one edge, particularly within the first 20 pages.<pb n="1"/>
S IS THE END
~fi/  end, for the moment, of all
this is my unfinal conclusion.
, reason in tangible things, and no
h:ie ordinary ways of the world.
eto grope, andfeet to stumble,
you may count on are the
System is a fairy and
erl.b find system where or
_:t. There are no reasons
?rand I don't know.
a       l     frmateally surprised if the police-
y grew wings, or if the deep
ed  out the chaos of the
?ot raise my eyebrows if the
e the Little Sunbeam  of
jCabinet Ministers struck for
s.  I feel no security in
_ t  seems no protection to me.
_r can find in an Encyclopedia,
ks Information Bureau, seems



<pb n="2"/>
THIS IS THE END
to me just a transitory adaptation to quick-
sand circumstances.
But if the things which I know in spite of
my education were false, if the eyes of the
sea forgot their secret, or if the accent of the
steep woods became vulgar, if the fairy ad-
ventures that happen in my heart fell flat, if
the good friends my eyes have never seen
failed me,-then indeed should I know empti-
ness, and  -astonishment that would kill.
J;Pant to introduce you to Jay, a 'bus-
.c'onductor and an idealist. She is not the
heroine, but the most constantly apparent
woman in this book. I cannot introduce you
to a heroine because I have never met one.
She was a person who took nothing in the
world for granted, but as she had only a slight
connection with the world, that is not saying
very much. Her answer to everything was
"Why?"     The fundamental facts that you'
and I accept from our youth upwards, like
Be Good and You Will Be Happy, or Change
Your Boots When You Come In Out Of The
Wet, or Respect Your Elders, or Love Your
Neighbour, or Never Cross Your Legs Above 
The Knee, did not impress Jay.



<pb n="3"/>
Is THE END
 kscw her as a baby, but I am sure
e.ve been born a.propounder of
l ;ild a smiler at the answers she
I daresay she used to ask ques-
ut result-long before she could
E am quite sure she was not em-
the lack of result. Nothing ever
Jay, not even her own pessimism. [
:finality about bitterness, and Jay
.Her last word was always
note. Her mind was always
]for more.    "Oh no," she
pillow at night, "there must
than that . . ."
_~[~B;_ 'hardly necessary to add that
with her Family, and run
Her Family knew neither
f  i      g ^ ^ Fng Ftor where she was doing
_e^^^^^     ipe incurably conceited, and this
ft, having broken away from
to the bad. On the contrary,
ondu ctor, but I only tell you
_ i^ H~fncce. I repeat the Family did
n4d does not know it yet.
_ ^^   ||uy sometimes said that Jay was
_^^:p ~but it did not really think so.
3



<pb n="4"/>
THIS IS THE END
The Family sometimes said that she was
rather mad, but it did not know how mad she
was, or it would have sent her away to live
in a doctor's establishment at Margate. It
never realised that it had only come in con-
tact with about one-fifth of its young relation,
and that the other four-fifths were shut away
from it. Shut away in a shining bubble world
with only room in it for one-for One, and
a shining bubble Story.
I do not know how universal an experience
a Secret Story and a Secret Friend may be.
Perhaps this wonder is a commonplace to you,
only you are more reticent about it than Jay
or I. But to me, even after twenty years'
intimacy with what I can only describe as a
supplementary life that I cannot describe, it
still seems so very wonderful that I cannot
believe I share it with every man and woman
in thfe street.
The great advantage of a Secret Story over
other stories is that you cannot put it into
print. So I can only show you the initial.
letter, and you may if you choose look upon
it as an imaginary hieroglyphic. Or you
may not.



<pb n="5"/>
_IS THE END
a bubble world can contain
'usset horizon of high woods
,attain, and from the horizon a
*niunending sea. You can run
,ihe dappled fields, you can run
cove and stroke the sea and
ate  minor singing of it. And
as strong as the morning, you
run against the wind, against
that never blows above your
-hen you feel as tired as the
mb slowly up the clifr path
ouse, the House you know
any house your ordinary
there you will find your
e best part about Secret
will never weary you by
share their House, your
to polish the base of that
t ends the banisters, you
delight of that wide short
'big turret room, a chimney so
ft that you can stand inside
d fireplace and whisper to the
down from the edge of the
a yard or two above you. 'You



<pb n="6"/>
THIS IS THE END
know how comfy those big beds are, you sit
at the long clothless table in the brown dining-
room. With all these things you are inti-
mate, and yet you pass through the place as
a ghost, your bubble enchantment encloses
you, your Secret Friends have no knowledge
of you, their story runs without you. Your
unnecessary identity is tactfully ignored, and.
you know the heaven of being dispassionate
and detached among things you love.
All these things can a bubble world contain.
You have to get inside things to find out how
limitless they are. And I think if you don't
believe it all, it is none the less true for that,
because in that case you are the sort of person
who believes a thing less the truer it is.
If Jay's Family did not know she was a
'bus-conductor, and did not know she was
a story-possessor, what did it know about
her? It knew she disliked the smell of
bananas, and that she had not taken advantage
of an expensive education, and that she was
Stock Size (Small Ladies'), and that she was
christened Jane Elizabeth, and that she took
after her father to an excessive extent, and
that she was rather too apt to swallow this



<pb n="7"/>
T: THIS IS THE END
onsense. As Families go, it was
informed about her.
mnily was a rather promiscuo one.
etortuous relationships than most
iave, although there were only four
counting Mr. Russell.
as well introduce you to the Family
e down to the story. From care-
of the press reviews I gather that a
considered a necessary thing in a
this time I am going to try and
y, if you please, meet the Family
at at Mr. Russell's house in Ken-
ot three months after Jay had run
re were four people in the room.
Cousin Gustus, Mrs. Gustus, Kew,
11.
me to try and tell you very
Mrs. Gustus, because she prided
l mplicity. Spelt with a capital S,
i  her Deity; her heaven was a
shadowless eternity, and plain
the flowers that grew  in her
fields.  She had simplified her life
. Even her smile was shorn of
7



<pb n="8"/>
THIS IS THE END
all accessories like dimples or twinkles. He
hair, which was not abundant, was the colour
of corn, straight and shining. Her eyes wer
a cold dark grey.
Now to be simple is all very well, but turn
it into an active verb and you spoil the whole
idea. To simplify seems forced, and I think.
Mrs. Gustus struck harder on the note of
simplification than tat o simplicity. I shu
notdare to criticise her, however, and Cousin
Gustus was satisfied, so criticism in any case
would be intrusive. It is just possible that
he occasionally wished that she would dress
herself in a more human way-patronise in
winter the humble Viyella stripe, for instance,
or in summer the flippant sprig. But a large'
proportion of Mrs. Gustus's faith was founded
on simple strong colours in wide expanses,.,
introduced, as it were, one to another by
judicious black. Ariybody but Mrs. Gustus
would have been drowned in her clothes.
But she was conceived on a generous scale,
she was almost gorgeous, she barely missed
exaggeration.  In her manner I think she did
not miss it.  She had therefore the gift of
coping with colour.  It remains for me to
8



<pb n="9"/>
_'HIS IS THE END
_          f^^^ l age was five-and-forty, and that
elist. The recording angel had
the fact of her novelism among
but she had an imperceptible
c. She wrote laborious books,
peevish sentences, of such very
_ ^^      icti~on that they were extremely
uderstand. She wore spectacles
_v~^^^lve tortoise-shell rims. She said,
Sig^    jit-sighted.  I am obliged to wear
_,;^^f Why should I try to conceal the
not have a pair of rimless ghosts
y face. I will wear spectacles
_    e^ t,1'1"  But the real truth was that
_  ^^   jhell rims were more becoming
Gustus was known to her
ly  as Anonyma.  The origin
was an old joke, and I have
_'point of it.
_ s^ ^t~   ustus was second cousin once
_          l^^*^Kew and Kew's sister Jay, and
_ ^^R~     ought them up from childhood.
at the further end of the sixties,
by many things: an unsuit-
, the approach of the psalmist's
j incurably modern surroundings, an
i    ;          Go~~~9



<pb n="10"/>
THIS IS THE END
internal complaint, and a haunting wish to
relieve the Government of the management o
the War. These drawbacks were to a certain
extent linked, they accounted for each other.
The complaint hindered him from offering
his services as Secretary of State; it made o
him a slave, so he could not pretend to be
a master.  He cherished his slavery, for i
happened to be painless, and supplied him
with a certain dignity which would otherwi
have been difficult to secure.  During th
summer the complaint hibernated, and cease
to interest either doctors or relations, whic
was naturally hard to bear. To these trial
you may add the disgraceful behaviour of h
young cousin Jay, and admit that Cousi
Gastus had every excuse for encouragin
pessimism of the most pronounced type.
/jay's brother Kew was twenty-five, an
/from this i flows that he had already drun
.the     Hii..s-iiof War. His milita
history included it Se isplinter ofhatein-th
lePite fdr'followed by a depressing pe'io
almostentirely spent in the society of medica
boards, three months of light duty consistin
of weary instruction of fools in an East coa



<pb n="11"/>
'IS THE END
an interval of leave at the end
attalion to which he had lately
hoped to'go to France. In
a pity he ever joined the Army,
ed badly with most of Mrs.
theories. But he had never
: his eye and his ear and his mind
yslow to appreciate clasihihng
..-was rather aloof friom
criticism, but not on principle.
principles-at least no origi
d all that. He never turned
as ar as te passer-by cold
a breezy life outside himself.
propounded riddles to his
is the way most of us make
the host and adopted member
was fifty-two. He did not
Rving only lately been culled by
that assiduous collector-and
bosom of the Family. She had
p blossoming unloved in the wilder-
.War. Work Committee. He was
TT



<pb n="12"/>
THIS IS THE END
well informed, yet a good listener; perha
he possessed both these virtues to excess. A
any rate Mrs. Gustus had decided that 
was worthy of Family friendship, and, bein
naturally extravagant, she conferred it upo
him  with both hands.   Mr. Russell wa
married to a woman who had not proper
realised the fact that she was Mrs. Russe
She spent her life in distant lands, helping th
world to become better. At present she w
understood to be propagating peace in t
United States, and was never mentioned b
or to her husband. My first impression
Mr. Russell was that he was rather fat, but
never could trace this impression to its origi
He had not exactly a double chin, but rath
a chin and a half, and the rest of him follow
this moderate example.  His grey hair re
tired in a pronounced estuary over eac
temple, leaving a beautifully brushed peninsu
between. He had no sense of humour, b
hid this deformity skilfully. Hardly anybod
knew that he was a poet, except presumabl
his dog. He often talked to his dog; he to
it every speakable thought that he had. Th
was his only bad habit. Occasionally his d
T2           .  -.



<pb n="13"/>
IS IS THE END
reply in a small curious voice
.from Mr. Russell.
_r people looked out at Kensington
ch were rejoicing in the very
the year.   The naked trees
rs in the mist, the grass was
tened to the distance, the world
its horizon, and one's eye slid up
k between the trees to where the
O f   a daylight moon whispered in
in a view that dispenses with
id Mrs. Gustus severely.   She
ke as though she were sure of the
what she intended to say. When
itate, it only meant that she was
r the simplest word, and she would
use with a monosyllable as curt as
glo~ry is the right word, I think, for
ftn some moods. Do you know the
r a heart beating too high, when you
t cliffs of London under rain or
ne, or rising out of yellow air ?
_ ever want, as I do, to stand with
_  against the London wind, and shout
:3



<pb n="14"/>
THIS IS THE END
your own unmade poetry on the top of
'bus? With this sort of grotesque glory
does London inspire me, so that I spe
whole days together feeling that the essen
I is too big for what encloses it.
Anonyma never felt like this. She oft
spoke the right word, but she nearly awa
spoke it coldly.
" This morning," said Kew, " when
looked out, I felt the futility of bed, so
made an assignation with the Hound wh
I met it trooping along with Russ in sin
file to the bathroom. Why does your Ho
always accompany you there, Russ ? D
must think us awfully irrational beasts,
yet-does that Hound really think you co
elope for ever and be no more seen, 
nothing on but pyjamas and a towel?
suppose he thinks ' You can't be too care
It makes one humble to live with a dog.
always blush when I see a dog dream
because I'm afraid they give us an undigni
place in their dreams. Your Hound, Ru
dreams of you plunging into the Serpenti
after a Canadian Goose, with your top
floating behind you, or Anonyma with



<pb n="15"/>
IS IS THE END
g out, scratching at a little
Piccadilly.  It is humiliating,
lyway, before breakfast, Russ's
I went and jumped over things
s. The park-keeper mistook
lambs."
Hound was called so by courtesy,
d him a dignity which he lacked.
e  been twelve inches high at the
he thought that he was exactly
except for a trifling difference in
ity is not, of course, incompatible
stature, but I think it was the
.gait of Mr. Russell's Hound that
of moral weight, and prevented
attaching great importance to his
lambs " exclaimed Mrs. Gustiis.
my good Kew, had you nothing
do?"
at that time," replied Kew. "You
up."  And he sang to drown her
ew was the only person I ever knew
ly sang to the tune of his moods.
Albert Hall sort of music very loudly
was happy, and when he was extremely
i5,



<pb n="16"/>
THIS IS THE END
happy he roared so that his voice broke out
of tune. When he was silent it was almost
always because he was asleep, or because some
other member of the Family was talking.
When, by some accident, the whole Family
was simultaneously silent, you could not help
noticingwhat an oppresivelystill place London
was. The sound of Russells Hound sneezing
in the hall waslike a bomb.
But at the present moment Kew only sang
a 'fw barif Beethoven in a. small voice. He
Wi    .: ra ' sad, because of Jay. He had not
realix',i he came home how very thoroughly
Jay I 4disappeared. He led the conversation
to          ofJt!'tIt often happened that Kew led
vsco n ations, because conversations, like the
publicgenerally follow the loudest voice.
"W:   4 so sudden?" asked Kew, apparently
of th  Round Pond, so loud was his voice.
" That's What I can't make out.. She used to
be such a human sort, and anybody with half
an eat could hear the decisions bubbling about
under the lid for. weeks before they boiled
over."
Everybody-even Cousin Gustus-knew
that he was talking of Jay. Kew said so



<pb n="17"/>
THIS IS THE END
much that he might be excused for forgetting
occasionally what he had not said. Besides,
he had talked of little else but Jay since he
rejoined his Family two days before.
"She used to be a good girl," sighed
Cousin Gustus. "So few girls are good."
Cousin Gustus is an expert pessimist. Vice,
accidents, and terrible ends are his speciality.
All virtue is to him an exception, and by him
is immediately forgotten. In sudden deaths
you cannot catch him out. If you were tossed
from the horns of a bull into the jaws of a
crocodile, and died of pneumonia contracted
during the flight, you would not surprise
Cousin Gustus. He is never at a loss for a
precedent. The only way you could really
astonish him would be by living a blameless
life without adventure, and dying of old age
in your bed.
"There were warnings," said Anonyma.
"Little disagreements with Gustus."
"She wanted to bring vermin into the
house," mourned Cousin Gustus.
Kew suggested: "White mice ?"
"Not vermin unattended," Anonyma ex-
plained.  "She wanted to adept Brown
T'              e



<pb n="18"/>
THIS IS THE END
Borough babies.   She had been working
desultorily in the Brown Borough since War
broke out."
"That might explain the peculiar and un-
Jay-like remark in her letter to you-that
she would settle in no home except the Perfect
Home. I hate.things in capital letters."
"Why didn't she get married ?" grumbled
Cousin Gustus. "'She was engaged for nearly
three week  to young William   Morgan, a
most pctable young man. So few young
mewt"i"^9*
i Sbhewote to me that she couldn't keep
up that eigagement," said Kew. "Not even
by looki0g  upon it as War Work.     She
·calld hai   a 'Surface young man,' and that
again eed unlike her. She usen't to mind
.sr.     . ' .8 ' The War seems to have turned
her  p   doS   -But-the      f-er     he
that pitpcio y   gnerally get a rush of.brins
to the lSAt  We're all feverish ts     s
he- -m Te' -^"iiTe s When I was im hospital
'-liv.-e, f .rhee .  eks on the top of a
high tempgrature, lahing. I want to laugh
now. ... It's a damn funny world."
t



<pb n="19"/>
THIS IS THE END
"I once knew a man who died of apoplexy
while swearing," sniffed Cousin Gustus.
"You have been damned unlucky in your
friends, Cousin Gustus," said Kew.  He
paused, and then added: "Besides, I hardly
ever say Damn without sayingoUn-damn to
myself afterwards. It seems a pity to waste
a precious word on an inadequate cause, and
I always retrieve it if I can."
"Before you came down to breakfast this
morning, Kew," said Anonyma, "we had an
idea."
" Only one between you in all that time ?"
said Kew. " I was half an hour late."
"Now, Kew, be an angel and agree with
the idea.  I've set my heart on it," said
Mrs. Gustus.
When Mrs. Gustus talked in a womanly
way like this, the change was always un-
mistakable. She was naturally an unnatural
talker, and when she mentioned such natural
things as angels, you knew she was resorting
deliberately to womanly charm in order to
attain her end. There was something very
cold-blooded about Anonyma's womanly
charm.



<pb n="20"/>
THIS IS THE END
"Good Lord," said Kew, "I wish angel
had never been invented. I never am one
only people always tell me to be one. I
never get officially recognised in heaven.
What is the plan?"
"There is Russell's car doing nothing,"
began Mrs. Gustus.
"Do you mean Christina?" interrupted
Kew, shocked at such formality. "Don't
call her Russell's car, it sounds so cold."
"There is Russell's Christina    doing
nothing," compromised Anonyma.     "And
petrol isn't so bad as it will be. And it's
a beautiful time of year.   And you are
not strong yet, really. And we want Jay
back."
"A procession of facts doesn't make a
plan," objected Kew.
"It may lead to one, eventually," said
Mrs. Gustus. "Oh, Kew, I want to go out
intor the country, I want to thread the pale
Spring air, and hear the lambs cry. I want
to brush my face against the grass, and wade
in a wave of bluebells. I want to forget blood
and Belgians and kiss Nature."
"Take a twenty- eight 'bus, and kiss



<pb n="21"/>
THIS IS THE END
Hampstead Heath," suggested Kew. "The
Spring has got there all right."
Anonyma, behind the coffee-pot, was
jotting down in a notebook the salient
points in her outburst. She always placed
her literary calling first.  And anyway,
I should be rather proud if I could talk
like that about the Spring without any
preparation.
" The idea originally," began Mr. Russell
tentatively, "was not only formed to allow
Mrs. Gustus to enjoy the Spring, but also to
make you quite strong before you go back
to work. And, again, not only that, but also
to try and trace your sister Jay."
Will you please imagine that continual
intercourse with very talkative people had
made Mr. Russell an adept at vocal compres-
sion. He had now almost lost the use of his
vowels, and if I wrote as he spoke, the effect
would be like an advertisement for a house-
maid during the shortage of wood-pulp. I
spare you this.
"There are three objections to the plan,"
said Kew.   "First, that Anonyma doesn't
really want to kiss the Spring; second, that
9T



<pb n="22"/>
MO~~CB1 END
I don't really     convaescent treatment;
third, that Jay doesn't really want to be
traced."
When Mrs. Gustus did not know the
answer to an objection she left it unanswered.
This is, of course, the simplest way. She
snapped her notebook.
" Oh, Kew," she said, "you promised you'd
be.an angel." The double row of semi-
detached bittons down her breast trembled
with eagernes.
.( Ai  lWer and angeller," sighed Kew, "I
never c   Fitted myself so far."
<" i     e  a clue with which to trace Jay,"
said *lo Gustus. " I had a letter from her
this        9
Kzw| i81  a satisfactory person to surprise.
He is neiar supercilious.
"Youheard from Jay !" he said, in a voice
as high ai his eyebrows.
The leter which Mrs. Gustus showed to
Kew mLaybe quoted here:
This plac has stood since the year twelve some-
thing, and its windows look down without even the
interruption of a sill at the coming and going of the
tides. It has hardly any garden, and immediately
aO



<pb n="23"/>
THIS IS THE END
to the right and the left of it the green down brims
over the top of the cliff like the froth of ale over a
silver goblet. To-night the tide is low, the sea is
golden where the shallow waves break upon the
sand, and ghostly green in the distance. When
the tide is high, the sound and the sight of it seem
to meet and make one thing. The waves press up
the cliff then, and fall back on each other. Do you
know the lines that are written on the face of a
disappointed wave  To-night the clouds are like
castles built on the plain of the sea. There is an
aeroplane at this moment-dim as a little thought-
coming between two turrets of cloud. I suppose it
is that I can hear, but it sounds like the distant
singing of the moon. I have come here to count
up my theories, to count them and pile them up
like money, in heaps, according to their value.
Theories are such beautiful things, there must be
some use in them. Or perhaps they are like money
from a distant country, and not in currency here.
Yet just as sheer metal, they must have some
value. ... It is wonderful that such happiness
should come to me, and that it should last. I have
the Sea and a Friend; there is nothing in the
world I lack, and nothing that I regret. ... .
"What better clue could you want?"
asked Mrs. Gustus. " We will take Christina
round the sea-coast."
23



<pb n="24"/>
THIS IS: THE END
"Looking for silver cliffs and a golden
sea," sighed Kerw,
I don't know if I have mentioned or con-
veyed to you that Mrs. Gustus was a deter-
mined woman. At any rate she 'was, and it
would therefore be waste of time to describe
the gradual defeat of Kew. The final stage
was the despatch of Kew to call on Nana in
the Brown Borough. Jay's, letter had the
Brown Borough postmark, so it had apparently
been sict to Nana to post. Nana might be
descibd aa the Second Clue in the pursuit of
Jay.. Shbe was the Family's only link with
Jay. :The one drawback of Nana as a clue
was that she was never to be found. Mrs.
Gustus had called six times, but had been
',*, led on each occasion by a totally dumb
: :fi(Oaint doo. But then Nana never had liked
Anonyma. Nana was simple herself in an
amateurish, unconscious sort of way, and I
expect she disliked Anonyma's professional
rivalry ii the matter of simplicity. But Kew
was always a favourite.
/The 'bus roared up the canyons of the
-City, and its voice accompanied Kew in his
tuneful meditations. A 'bus is not really well



<pb n="25"/>
THIS IS THE END
adapted for meditation. On my feet I can
stride across unseen miles musing on love, in
a taxi I can think about to-morrow's dinner,
but on a 'bus my thoughts will go no further
than my eyes can see. So Kew, although he
thought he was thinking of Jay, was really
considering the words in front of him-To
Stop O'Bus strike Bell at Rear.l He deduced
from this that it was an Irish 'bus, and sup-
posed that this accounted for its rather head-
long behaviour. He spent some moments in
imagining the MacBus, child of a sterner race,
which would run gutturally without skids,
and wear a different cut of bonnet.
He dismounted into a faint yellow fog
diluted with a faint twilight, in the Brown
Borough. The air was vague, making it not
so much an impossibility to decipher the
features of people approaching as a surprise
to find it possible. A few rather premature
barrow-flares adapted Scripture to modern
conditions by hiding their light under tin
substitutes for bushels, in the hope of pro-
tecting such valuables as cat's meat and bananas
from  aerial outrage.  Kew   pranced over
He must have changed at the Bank into a Tilling 'bus.
2C



<pb n="26"/>
THIS IS THE END
prostrate children, and curved about the
pavement to avoid artificially vivacious passers-
by, who emerged from the public-houses.
Nana lived in a little alley which was like
a fiord of peace running in from the shrill
storm of the Brown Borough.    Here little
cottages shrank together, passive resisters of
the twentieth century. Low crooked windows
blinked through a mask of dirty creepers.
Each little front garden contained a shruIb
and was guarded by a low railing, although
there would have been no room for a tres-
passer in addition to the shrub.   Nana's
house, at the end of the alley, looked along
it to the far turmoil of the mother-street.
Kew insulted the gate, as usual, by stepping
over it, and knocked at the door. He held
his breath, so that he might more keenly hear
the first whisperings of the floor upstairs,
which would show that Nana was astir.
A-gardenful of cats came and told him that
his hopes were vain. Cats only exist, I think,
for the chastening of man. They never come
to me except to tell me the worst, and to
crush me with quiet sarcasm should my
optimism survive their warning.
9/iA



<pb n="27"/>
THIS IS THE END
But before the cats had finished speaking,
there was a most un-Nana-like sound of
bounding within, and Jay appeared. She
threw herself out of the darkness of the door
on to the twilit Kew.
The cats were ashamed to be seen watching
this almost canine display, and went away.
"I didn't know you weren't in France,"
said Jay to Kew.
*. "I didn't know you weren't in Heaven,"
said Kew to Jay.   "What's all this about
golden seas and aeroplanes snarling around ?"
" Oh, snarling. . . . That's just what they
do," said Jay. "Let's pretend I said that."
It seemed as if childhood turned its face
to them again after a thousand years. These'\
roaring months of War run like a sea between
us and our peaceful beginnings, so that a
catchword flashed across out of our past is as
beautiful and as incredible as the light in a
dream.
When they were little they used to bargain
for expressive words. Their childhood was
full of such hair-splittings as: "If you tell
how we said Wank-wank to the milkman,
you must let me have the old lady who had
27



<pb n="28"/>
THIS IS THE END
a palpitation and puffocated running after
the 'bus."
They were not spontaneous people. They
were born with too great a love of words, a
passion for drama at the expense of truth,
and *i habit of overweighting common life
with romance. It was perhaps good for them
to have acquired such a very simple relation
by marriage as Anonyma.
"About the sea," said Jay, " I'll tell you
later."
"WeI, tell me first why you found home
so suddenly unbearable. You've stood it for
eighteen years."
"I've been a child all through those eighteen
years. And to a child just the fact of grown-
upness is so admirable. I wonder why. But
,ider the fierce light that beats from the eye
'f a  woman suddenly and violently grown
'old, Cousin Gustus and Anonyma don't-
well, Kew, do they?"
The dusk filled the room as water fills a
cup, and to look up at the light of an outside
lamp on the ceiling was like looking up
through water at the surface. Jay wore a
dress of the same colour of the dusk, and her
oR



<pb n="29"/>
THIS IS THE END
round face, faint as a bubble, seemed to float
on its background unsupported.
"Didn't you think about adopting a baby ?"
suggested Kew. " That evidently put Cousin
Gustus's back up."
"I didn't put Cousin Gustus's back up so
high as he put mine," answered Jay. "Oh,
Kew, what are the old that they should check
us?   What's the use of this war of one
generation against another ? Old people and 
young people reach a deadlock that's as bad
as marriage without the possibility of divorcej
Isn't all forced fidelity wrong ?"
"What did you do, tell me, and what are
you going to do ?"
c Oh well, I felt something like frost in the
air, and I couldn't define it. Really, it was
work waiting to be done. Not work for the
poor, but work with the poor. At home I
talked about work, and Anonyma wrote about
it, and Cousin Gustus shuddered at it. You
were doing it all right, but where was I?
Three days a week with soldiers' wives. My
brow never sweated a drop. I thought there
must be something better than a bird's-eye
view of work. So I took a job at a bolster



<pb n="30"/>
·   'I  "t ,,  , ».'    1' I  /
THIS IS THE END
place. ... Oh well, it doesn't matter now.
I earned ten shillings a week, and paid half-a-
crown for a little basement back. On Saturdays
I got my Sunday clothes out of pawn, and
came to tea with Nana. Do you remember
the scones and the Welsh Rarebit that Nana
used to make ? I believe those things were
worth the terror of the pawnshop. Oh, Kew,
those pawnshops   Those little secret stalls
that put shame into you where none was
before. The pawn man-why is it that when
you': already frightened is the moment that
men choose to frighten you ? Because weak-
ness is the worst crime. That I have proved.
My work was putting fluff into bolsters.
There was a big bright grocers' calendar-the
Death of Nelson-and if I could see it through
the fog of fluff I felt that was a lucky day. I
had to eat my lunch there, raspberry jam
sandwiches-not fruit jam, you know, but
raspberry flavour. It wasn't nice, and it used
to get flufft in that air.  The others sat
round and munched and picked their teeth
and read Jew newspapers. Have you ever
noticed that whichever way up you look at a
Jew newspaper, you always feel as if you could



<pb n="31"/>
THIS IS THE END
read it better if you were standing on your
head? My governor was a Jew too. He
wasn't bad, but he looked wet, and his hair
was a horror to me. His voice was tired of
dealing with fluff-though he didn't deal
with it so intimately as we did-and it only
allowed him to whisper.  The forewoman
was always cross, but always as if she would
rather not be so, as if she were being cross for
a bet, and as if some one were watching her to
see she was not kind by mistake. She looked
terribly ill, because she had worked there for
three months, which was a record. I stood
it five weeks, and then I had a hemorrhage
-only from the throat, the doctor said. I
wanted to go to bed, but you can't, because
the panel doctors in these parts will not come
to you. My doctor was half an enormous
mile away, and it seemed he only existed
between seven and nine in the evenings. So
I stayed up, so as not to get too weak to
walk. I went and asked the governor for
my stamps. I had only five stamps due to
me, only five valuable threepences had been
stopped out of my wages. But I had a silly
conviction at that time that the Insurance
31



<pb n="32"/>
THIS IS THE END
Act was invented to help working people.
What an absurd idea of mine! I went to
the Jew for my card. He said mine was a
hard case, but I was not entitled to a card;
nobody under thirty, he said, was allowed by
law to have a card.  So I said it was only
fair to tell him I was going to the Factory
and Insurance Inspectors about him. I told
him lots of things, and I was so angry that I
cried. He was very angry too, and made
me fee sick by splashing his wet hair about.
He said it was unfair for ladies to interfere in
things they knew nothing about. I said I
intefered because I knew nothing about it,
but tha now I knew. I said that ladies and
won:   had exactly the same kind of inside,
and it w  a kind that never thrived on fluff
intead of food. I told him how I spent my
ten shlngs. He couldn't interrupt really,
becauei he had no voice. Then I fainted,
and a friend I have there, called Mrs. Love,
came in. She had been listening at the door.
She was very good to me.
"Then, when I was well again, I found
another job, but I shan't tell you what it is.
As for the Inspectors, I complained, but-
2a



<pb n="33"/>
THIS IS THE END
what's the use? So long as you must put
fluff of that pernicious kind into bolsters, just
so long will you kill the strength and the
beauty of women. It looked so like a dead-
lock that it frightened me, and now in this
wonderful life I lead, my Friend won't let
me think of it. A deadlock is a dreadful
accident, isn't it ? because in theory it doesn't
exist. I am working for a new end now.
Isn't it splendid that there is really no Place
Called Stop? There is always an end beyond
the end, always something to love and look
forward to. Life is a luxury, isn't it? there's
no use in it-but how delightful! "
t      " You haven't told me about the sea yet,"
said Kew.
!      "Because I don't think you'd believe me.
We were always liars, weren't we?   That's
because we're romantic, or if it's not romance,
the symptoms of the disease are very like.
Why can't we get rid of it all as Anonyma
does?    She has no gift except the gift of
being able to get rid of superfluous romance.
; :i  She takes that great ease impersonally, her
pose is, 'It's a gift from  Heaven, and an
infernal bore.' But I never get nearer to
R' .~i                    3.3~            D



<pb n="34"/>
THIS IS THE END
joy than I do in this Secret World of mine,
and with my Secret Friend."
"But what is it ? What is he like "
"I should be guilty of the murder of a
secret if I told you. He isn't particularly
romantic. I have seen him in a poor light;
I have watched him in a most undignified
temper; I have known him when he wanted
a shave. I don't exist in this World of mine.
I am just a column of thin air, watching with
my soul."
" Then you're reallytelling lies toAnonyma
when you write about it all ? I'm not re-
proaching you of course, I only want to get
my mind clear."
"I suppose they're lies," assented Jay rue-
filly, "though it seems sacrilege to say so,
for I know these things better than I know
myself. But Truth-or Untruth, what's the
use of words like that when miracles are in
question?"
"Oh, damn this What's the Use Trick,"
said Kew. "I suppose you picked that up
in this private Heaven of yours. The whole
thing's absolutely--   My dear little Jay,
am I offending you ?"



<pb n="35"/>
THIS IS THE END
"Yes," said Jay.
Kew sighed.
Chloris sighed too. Chloris had played
the thankless part of third in this interview.
She was Jay's friend, a terrier with a black
eye. She shared Jay's burning desire to be of
use, and, like most embryo reformers, she had
a poor taste in dress. She wore her tail at an
aimless angle, without chic; her markings
were all lopsided. But her soul was ardent,
and her life was always directed by some
rather inscrutable theory or other. As a
puppy she had been an inspired optimist, with
legs like strips of elastic clumsily attached to
a winged spirit. Later she had adopted a
vigorous anarchist policy, and had inaugurated
what was probably known in her set as the
"Bite at Sight Campaign."  Cured of this,
she had become a gentle Socialist, and em-
braced the belief that all property-especially
edible property-should be shared. Appetites,
she argued, were meant to be appeased, and
he preservation of game-or anything else-
the larder was an offence against the com-
ty.  Now, at the age of five or so, she
d cynicism, pretended temporarily that



<pb n="36"/>
THIS IS THE END
life had left a bitter taste in her mouth, ar
sighed frequently.
"Kew," said Jay presently, "will you pr<
mise not to tell the Family you saw me?
don't want it to know about me. After al
theories are driving me, and theories don
concern that Family of ours. What's the u
of a Family ? (I'm saying this just to exa
perate you.)  A Family's just a little knot
not necessarily congenial people, with Fa
rubbing their heads together so as to stril
sparks of love. Love-what's the use
Love?   I'd like to catch that Love and be
his ears, making such a fool of the worl
What's the use?"
"God knows," said Kew.. "Cheer u
my friend, I promise I won't tell the Fami
I've seen you, or anything about you." t
the same moment he remembered the mot
tour.
"Promise faithfully ?"
"Faithfully."
"It's a lovely word faithful, isn't it ?" s
said, 'wriggling in her chair. "Yours fait
fully is a most beautiful ending to a lette
Why is it that faith with a little F is such
_tI



<pb n="37"/>
THIS IS THE END
perfect thing, and yet Faith, grown-up Faith
in Church, is so tiring ?"
" Perhaps one is overworked and the other
isn't," suggested Kew.
As he went out into the darkness the
noise of London sprang into his ears, and the
remote brown room where he had left Jay
seemed to become divided from him by great
distances. The town was like a garden, and
he, an insect, pressed through its under-
growth.   The rare lamps and the stars
flowered above him.
g7



<pb n="38"/>
1;



<pb n="39"/>
MY yesterday has gone, has gone, and left me
tired;
And now to-morrow comes and beats upon the door;
So I have built to-day, the day that I desired,
Lest joy come not again, lest peace return no more,
Lest comfort come no more.
So I have built to-day, a proud and perfect day,
And I have built the towers of cliffs upon the sands.
The foxgloves and the gorse I planted on my way.
The thyme, the velvet thyme, grew up beneath my
hands,
Grew pink beneath my hands.
So I have built to-day, more precious than a
dream;
' And I have painted peace upon the sky above;
And I have made immense and misty seas that seem
More kind to me than life, more fair to me than love,
a More beautiful than love.
And I have built a House, a House upon the brink
fhigh and twisted cliffs,-the sea's low singing fills it.
d there my Secret Friend abides, and there I think
R hide my heart away before to-morrow kills it,
cold to-morrow kills it.
39



<pb n="40"/>
THIS IS THE END
Yes, I have built to-day, a wall against to-morrow,
So let to-morrow knock, I shall not be afraid,
For none shall give me death, and none shall give me
sorrow,
And none shall spoil this darling day that I have made.
No storm shall stir my sea. No night but mine shall
shade
This day that I have made.
AO



<pb n="41"/>
"WE will start on our quest to-morrow,"
said Anonyma. "To-day I must work."
Nobody in Anonyma's circle was ever
allowed to forget that she spent four hours
a week in the service of her country. You
would never guess how much insight into the
souls of the poor, four hours a week can give
to a person like Anonyma. She had written
two books about the Brown Borough since
the outbreak of War. The provincial Press
had been much impressed by their vivid pic-
ture of slum realities. Anonyma's poor were
always yearning, yearning to be understood
and loved by a ministering upper class, yearn-
ing for light, for art, for self-expression, for
novels by high-souled ladies. The atmosphere
of Anonyma's fiction was thick with yearning.
Anonyma always came home from        her
^Work with what she called "word-vignettes"
_ in her notebook. She gave her Family the
41



<pb n="42"/>
THIS IS THE END
benefit of these during the rest of the week,
besides fitting them into her books. So that
although Cousin Gustus always conscientiously
bought a dozen copies of each novel as it
came out, he really wasted his money, for he
was obliged to know all his wife's copy by
heart before it got into print. By speaking
each thought as well as writing it, Anonyma
rather unfairly won a reputation twice over
with the same material.
Anonyma produced a vignette now, in
order to show how necessary it was that she
should hurry to her yearning flock.
"I came into the room of one of my
sail6rs' wives last week, and I found her with
a baby sobbing on her breast, and an empty
hearth at her feet. I thought of the eternal
tragedy of womanhood. I said, 'Will my
love help, my dear ?'"
There was a pause, and Cousin Gustus
sighed.
" What did she say ? " asked Kew, without
expecting an answer from the artist. After
all, a word-vignette is not intended to have a
sequel. It is supposed to fall complete with
a little splash into your silent understanding.



<pb n="43"/>
THIS IS THE END
I must say Kew was rather tiresome in refusing
to be content with the splash.
"So few women really understand how to
stop a child crying," said Cousin Gustus,
speaking from bitter and universal experience.
"That's the point," said Kew. "The
child had probably swallowed a pin."
It generally breaks my heart to hear a story
spoilt, but with Anonyma's word-vignettes I
did not mind, because they were told as true,
and yet they did not ring true. I must tell
you that Anonyma had married into a family
of accomplished white liars, and to them the
ring of truth was as unmistakable as the
dinner-bell. Few people could lie success-
fully to Kew or Jay, they knew that art from
the inside. White lies are easily justified,
but almost any lie can be whitewashed. Apart
*from the mutual attitude of Kew and Jay,
who possessed something between them that
might be called good faith, there was hardly
any trust included in that family relationship.
Cousin Gustus distrusted youth. He thought
mung people were always either lying to him
laughing at him, and indeed they often
.  Only not so often as he thought. He
_ Z              ,~~~~~~4



<pb n="44"/>
THIS IS THE END
was no prop on which to repose confidence,
and it was very easy both to tell him lies and
not to tell him facts.
Mrs. Gustus had no gift of intimacy.
She was reserved about everything except
herself, or what she believed to be herself.
The self that she shared so generously with
others was, however, not founded on fact,
but modelled on the heroine of all her books.
She killed her heroine whenever possible-
I think she only once married her,-yet still
the creature remained immortal in Mrs.
Gustus's public personality. She concealed
or transformed everything that did not seem
artistic. Her notebook was a tangle of self-
deceptions. The rest of the Family knew
this. They never pretended to believe her.
Kew and Jay were skilled romancers, fact
was clay in their hands. Nobody had ever
taught them such a dull lesson as exact truth-
fulness. If they built the bare bones of their
structures fairly accurately, they placed the
whole in an artificial light, altering in some
effective way the spirit of the facts. Educa-
tion had impressed the importance of technical
truthfulness on Kew. But he was a quick
A A



<pb n="45"/>
THIS IS THE END
talker, and in order to keep him in line with
his tongue, nature had made him quick of
wit, quick in argument, and unconsciously
quick in making and seeing loopholes for
escape.
He was at present perfectly comfortable
in his anomalous position regarding a search
round the sea-coast for a Jay he knew to be
in the Brown Borough.
"If I am going to work, I must go," said
Anonyma. " Russ and I will go together as
far as the Underground."
She looked at herself in the glass. The
scarlet bird in her hat had an arresting ex-
pression. As she was putting on her gloves
she said, "I'm sorry, Kew, about your dis-
appointment, not finding Nana at home last
night. But I told you so."
She had no fear of this much-shunned
phrase.
"Never mind," said Kew mildly. "We'll
put Christina on the track to-morrow."
Mr. Russell said a polite Good-bye to his
Hound, and accompanied his friend Anonyma
to the Underground.   That was a fateful
little journey for him.



<pb n="46"/>
THIS IS THE END
/  As he turned from Anonyma's side at the
bookstall, he noticed a 'bus positively beckon- 
ing to him. It had a lady conductor, and she 
was poised expectantly, one hand on the bell 
and the other beckoning to Mr. Russell.
His nature was docile, and the 'bus was bound
for Chancery Lane, his destination.  He
mounted the 'bus.
I need hardly tell you that a 'bus that
makes deliberate advances to the public is the 
rarest sight in London. The self-respecting
'bus looks upon the public as dust beneath its
tyres.  Even a Brigadier-General with red
tabs, on his way to Whitehall, looks pathetic-
ally humble waggling his cane at a 'bus.
All 'bus-drivers have a kingly look; it comes
from their proud position. The rest of the
world is only worthy to communicate with
that noble race by means of nqds and becks
and wreathed smiles.
"Chancery Lane, please," said Mr. Russell.
"But why    did  you  stop  specially for
me?"
" I thought your wife hailed me, sir," lied
the 'bus-conductor.
Any allusion to his wife mildly annoyed
A6



<pb n="47"/>
THIS IS THE END
Mr. Russell.   "Not my wife," he said.
"Merely a friend."
"Oh, I beg your pardon, sir," said the
'bus-conductor, and underlined the "beg" with
the ting of her ticket-puncher.  She was
rather a darling 'bus-conductor, because she
was also Jay. She had a short, though not a
fat face, soft eyes, and very soft hair cut
short to just below the lobes of her ears.
A gentleman with dingy but elaborate
boot-uppers hailed and mounted the 'bus,
"Shufftesbury Uvvenue ?" he asked.   He
said it that way, of course, because he was a
Shakespearian actor.  The 'bus-conductor
gave him his ticket, and then took her stand
upon her platform, more or less unaware that
Mr. Russell and the actor, both next to the
door and opposite to each other, were looking
at her with a pleased look.
Mr. Russell thought for some time, and
then he said, "'T's a b'tiful day."
"That's what it is," replied the 'bus-con-
' ductor. "I wonder if it's wrong to enjoy
L being a 'bus-conductor ?"
"I shouldn't think so," said Mr. Russell
autiously.  "Why ?"
Ig!                  47



<pb n="48"/>
THIS IS THE END
The'bus-conductor waved her hand towards
a State hint that shouted in letters six foot
high from an opposite wall: "DON'T USE
A MOTOR CAR FOR PLEASURE." 
Mr. Russell read it very carefully and said
nothing.
"This is a motor car," observed the
'bus-conductor, glancing at her inaccessible
chauffeur. "And as for pleasure . .."
The high houses rose out of the earth like
Alps, and the roar in the morning was like
large music.  She knew she had been an
Olympian in a recent life, because she found
herself familiar with greater and more gorgeous
speed than any 'bus attains, and with the
divine discords that high mountains and high
cities sing.
"I hope it's not wrong, because I'm going
on a motor tour to-morrow," said Mr. Russell.
"On business of a sort, and yet also on
pleasure. On a search, as a matter of fact."
" Oh, any search is pleasure," said the 'bus-
conductor.  "Especially if it's an abstract
search."
"'Tisn't," said Mr. Russell.  "'T's a
search for a person."
.o 



<pb n="49"/>
THIS IS THE END
The 'bus-conductor looked at the sky.
"And are Anonyma and Kew going too ? "
she thought.. You must bear in mind that
she had deliberately plucked him from the
side of Anonyma.
" Perhaps any pleasure is wrong in these
days," she said.
"Come, come," said the actor. " Whut's
wrung with these days?   A German ship
sunk yesterday. Thut's pleasurable enough."
The 'bus-conductor turned a cold eye
upon him.
"I can cheer, but not laugh over such
news as that," she said pompously. "Doesn't
even a German find the sea bitter to drown
in? An English woman or a German butcher,
isn't it all the same when it comes to a Me,
with a throat full of water ? Hasn't a German
got a Me ?"
The actor looked at his boot-uppers. Mr.
Russell thought. ShufftesburyUvvenuearrived
soon, and the actor alighted with some relief.
When the 'bus started again, the 'bus-
conductor said, "Don't you think the only
way you can get pleasure out of it all is by
treating life as a bead upon a string ?"
s:,                  AO             E



<pb n="50"/>
THIS IS THE END
"That's a sufficient way, surely," said
Mr. Russell. " If you can truly reach it."
In the Strand he asked, "May I come in
this 'bus again ?"
"This is a public 'bus," observed the
'bus-conductor.
"This is Monday," said Mr. Russell.
"May I gather that during this week your
'bus will be passing Kensington Church at
half-past eleven every morning ? "
The 'bus-conductor did not answer. She
went to the top of the 'bus to say, "Fezz plizz."
Mr. Russell thought so furiously that he
was only roused by the sound of St. Paul's
striking apparently several dozen in his
immediate vicinity.
"This is Ludgate Hill. I only paid you
as far as Chancery Lane. I owe you another
halfpenny," said Mr. Russell.
" A penny," said the 'bus-conductor.
As he disappeared she thought, "There 
is something remarkable about that man. I
wish I hadn't been so prosy. I wonder where 
and why Anonyma picked him up."       -
When Mr. Russell came home that evening,'
he said, "I met--  " "
*                  5o                   .1



<pb n="51"/>
THIS IS THE END
"Isn't it wonderful-the people and the
things one meets?" said Mrs. Gustus. "I
met to-day a child with nothing but one
garment on, rolling like a sparrow in the dust.
The one garment, I thought, was the only
drawback in the scene. Why can't we get
back to simplicity ?"
Mr. Russell, on second thoughts, was glad
he had been interrupted. He did not feel
discouraged, only he decided not to try again.
His Hound jumped on to his knee and put a
paw into his hand.
" I also persuaded a woman to give up
drink," continued Mrs. Gustus. "I put it
to her on the ground of simplicity. She was
in bed, having been drunk the night before,
and I sat on her bed with my hand on hers.
I said, 'Dear fellow-woman, there are no
essentials in life but bread and water and love.
Everything else is a sort of skin-disease which
has appeared on the surface of Nature, a
disease which we call civilization.' She cried
bitterly, and I gathered that she was lacking
in all three essentials. I went and bought her
four loaves of bread, on condition she would
promise never to touch intoxicants again. I
_K.; .



<pb n="52"/>
THIS IS THE END
said I would not go away until she promised.
She promised. I left her still crying." 
Cousin Gustus sighed. He never went ,
about himself, and only saw   the worlds
through his wife's eyes. This did not tend
to cure his pessimism.
"It is wonderful how one can reach the
bed-rock of life in two hours among the poor 
and simple," said Mrs. Gustus. "By the
way, I only put in two hours to-day, because
I think I can do better work in two hours.
twice a week than in four hours once. So I
shall come up for the afternoon one day this
week from wherever we are by then, and
leave you three men prostrate on some shore,
with your ears to Nature, like a child's ear
to a shell."
She groped for her notebook.
"I must come up now and then too," said 
Mr. Russell, and poked his Hound secretly
in the ribs.
I can't tell you what countless miles away
his 'bus-conductor was by now. A certain
fraction of her, to be sure, was sitting in the 
dark room at Number Eighteen Mabel Place,
e9 2



<pb n="53"/>
THIS IS THE END
Brown Borough, with fierce hands pinching
the table-cloth, and a hot forehead on the
table. All day long the thirst for a secret
journey had been in her throat. All day
long the elaborate tangle of London had
made difficult her way, but she had kicked
aside the snare now, and her free feet were
on the step of the House by the Sea.
No voices met her at the door, the hall
was empty. The firelight pencilled in gold
the edges of the wooden figure that presided
over the stairs. I think I told you about
that figure. I never knew whose it was-a
saint's I think, but her virtuous expression
was marred by her broken nose, and the
finger with which she had once pointed to
Heaven was also broken. Her figure was
rather stiff, and so were her draperies, which
fell in straight folds to her blocklike feet.
Her right hand was raised high, and her left
was held alertly away from her side and had
unseparated fingers. She had seen a great
procession of generations pass her pedestal,
but she never saw Jay. Of course not, for
Jay was not there. Only a column of thin
watching air haunted the House.



<pb n="54"/>
THIS IS THE END 
There are many ghosts that haunt the
House by the Sea. Jay is, of course, one of |
them, and for this reason she knows more
about ghosts than any one I know. Frag-
ments of untold stories are familiar to her.
She knows how you may hear in the dark a
movement by your bed, and fling out your
hand and feel it grasped, and then feel the
grasp slide up from  your hand to your
shoulder, from your shoulder to your throat,
from your throat to your heart. She knows
how you may go between trees in the moon-
light to meet your friend, and find suddenly
that some one is keeping pace with you, and j
how you, mistaking this companion for your
friend, may say some silly greeting that only
your friend understands.  And how your 
heart drops as you hear the first breath of
the reply. She knows how, walking in the
mid-day streets of London, you may cross 
the path of some Great One who had a prior
right by many thousand years to walk beside
the Thames. These are the ghost stories
that never get told. Few people can read
them between the lines of press accounts of
inquests, or in the dignified announcements



<pb n="55"/>
THIS IS THE END
of the failure of hearts, on the front page of
the Morning Post. But Jay knows, because
of her intimacy with the House by the Sea.
There she meets her fellow-ghosts.
The House, as I told you, has hardly any
garden; having the sea, it doesn't need one.
But there is a little formal place about twenty
paces across, set, as it were, in the heart of
the House. A small prim square, bounded
on the north, south and east by the House
itself, and on the west by the cliff and the
sea. There is a stone balustrade to divide
the garden from space. In the middle of the
square is a stone basin with becalmed water-
lilies and of course goldfish. Round the
basin the orderly ranks of little clipped box
hedges manceuvre. The untamed elements
in the garden are the climbing things, they
sing in gold and yellow and orange and red
from the walls. The only official way into
the garden is a door from the House, a bald
door without eyebrows, so to speak, like all
the doors and windows in the House. But
there is an unofficial way into the garden, and
Jay found her Secret Friend there. This is
the short cut to the sea. In other words,
r               ~~~55



<pb n="56"/>
THIS IS THE END
it is a wriggly ladder, one end of which you
attach to a hook in the wall, and the other
you throw over the balustrade down the cliff
to the sea. It is a-long way to walk round
the House and along the cliff and down to
the sea by the path. And just as the house-
agents always want to be one minute and a
half from the church and the post-office, so
we in the Secret House cannot afford to be
more than a minute and a half from the sea.
The Secret Friend was there, and he was
gazing so earnestly down the cliff that his
hair was hanging forward most unbeautifully,
and he was rather red in the face. He was
looking at a little boat which was on its way
towards the foot of the wriggly ladder. A
schooner with the low sun climbing down
her rigging breathed on the breathing sea
not far away. The tide was high.
The oars of the little boat suddenly
wavered and were paralysed. One of the
rowers made a quick movement with his hand.
"It's the Law," said the Secret Friend,
and he tried spasmodically to extinguish the
sun with his hand. "It's the Law. The
man with the tall and dewy brow."
6



<pb n="57"/>
THIS IS THE END
The Law, in a fat officious-looking boat,
came sneaking round the near point of the
cliff. The air was so still, and the sea so
calm, that you could hear the sides of the
boat grate against the cliff. And the air was
so clear that you could see the tall and dewy
brow of the Law, as he stood up and
discovered the wriggly ladder.
"To have a face like that," said the
Secret Friend, "is to challenge fate.  It
makes me sick."
" What is this ?" asked the Law, although
there seemed little doubt that the thing was
a wriggly ladder. No one answered; so the
Law rowed to the foot of the thing in
question. The Secret Friend jerked it up
about six feet, and secured it so.
The Law cleared its throat, and looked
nervously at the schooner, and at the sun,
and at the other boat, and at the Secret
Friend. The Law likes to be argued with.
Take away words and where is the Law?
Silence always annoys it.
Yet there was no silence in the Secret
World. I remember how the roses sang,
and how the sea mourned over the confusion
>b                     ee



<pb n="58"/>
THIS IS THE END
of its gentle dreams. The knocking of the
slow sea upon the cliff seemed like the ticking
of the great clock that is our world. It was
a night when every horizon had heaven
calling from the other side.
The Story went on ....
It was Chloris who brought Jay back to
Number Eighteen Mabel Place, Brown
Borough. Chloris gave an unromantic snort
and sat with unnecessary clumsiness upon
Jay's toe. So Jay returned, falling suddenly
out of the music of the sea into the band-of-
hopeful music of distant Boy Scouts on the
march.
Number Eighteen Mabel Place is not, as a
rule, a hopeful place to return to. Jay and I
know quite well what Satan felt like when he
was expelled from Heaven.
So Jay, whose refuge from most ills was
talk, went to see a friend. She had many
friends in the Brown Borough, and most of
them were what Mrs. Gustus would call " un-
deserving."  Mrs. Gustus has a very high
mind; she and the C.O.S. are dreadfully
grown-up institutions, I think; they forget



<pb n="59"/>
THIS IS THE END
what it feels like to have a good rampageous
kick against the pricks. Nearly everybody
in the Brown Borough enjoys a kick once a
week (on pay-day)-and some of us go on
kicking all our lives. At any rate, the Brown
Borough is peopled with babies young and
old, and high minds and grown-up institu-
tions are apt to look over heads. Jay had a
low mind and walked about on the Brown
Borough level.
" I have got neuralgia," said Jay to Chloris,
"my hat feels too tight. My head feels like
ttte de veau farcie. I shall go and talk to
Mrs. 'Ero Edwards."
And so she did, and found that Mrs. 'Ero
Edwards had been wanting to see her to tell
her that the war would be over in June, and
that the Edwards's nephew knew on the best
authority that the Kaser couldn't get no
kipper to his breafast any more because Pre-
serdink Wilson was a-holding of them up
upon the high seas, and that Jimmy Wragge
was "wanted" for "helping himself," and
that young Dusty Morgan, the lodger, had
gone fori soldier, and his wife had taken his
job as driver of a van.



<pb n="60"/>
THIS IS THE END
"There's only two jobs now," said Mrs.
'Ero Edwards, "wot you never see a woman
doin', and one's a burglar, an' the other's a
scarecrow."
Jay said, " The lady burglars would be so
clever they'd never get into the papers, and
the lady scarecrows would be so attractive
that they'd fascinate the birds."
And then Mrs. 'Ero Edwards considered
what she would say to an 'Un if she had him
here, and Jay was called upon to provide
'Unnish replies in the 'Unnish lingo. Her
German was so patriotically rusty that she
could think of no better retorts than " Nicht
hinauslehnen," or "Bitte nicht zu rauchen,"
or " Heisses Wasser, bitte," or "Wacht am
Rhein," or "Streng verboten."   Yet the
dramatic effect of the interview was very good
indeed, and Mrs. 'Ero Edwards's arguments
were unanswerable in any tongue.
And then they thought they would make
a surprise for young Mrs. Dusty Morgan, the
lodger, against she come back from work,
because she was that down'earted. So they
went and bought some ribbon to tie up the
curtains, an&some flowers for the table, and
60



<pb n="61"/>
THIS IS THE END
put the chairs in happy and new attitudes of
expectancy, and cleaned the windows, putting
a piece of white paper on the broken pane
instead of the rag, which was rather weary of
its job. And then Mrs. 'Ero Edwards con-
fided to Jay that young Mrs. Dusty wanted
very much to find the picture of a real tip-top
soldier, so that she might look at it and re-
member how this business was going to make
a man of young Dusty. And Jay went all
the way to the City and could find no picture
of a tip-top soldier, and then she came back
to the Brown Borough, and because of the
intervention of Providence, found Albrecht
Darer's "St. George" second-hand in a Jew-
shop. And they hung it up over the mantel-
piece, and decided that it was rather like
Dusty, if it wasn't for the uniform. And the
general effect was so superb that Jay nearly
spoilt it all by jumping a hole in the floor, so
as to jog Time's elbow and bring Mrs. Dusty
home quickly to see it all. It was a very
delicate floor. Jay always jumped when she
was impatient. She did everything with double
fervour, and where you or I would have
stamped one foot, she stamped two at once.
6z



<pb n="62"/>
THIS IS THE END                '
Mrs. Dusty Morgan came back a little bit 
drunk. When she saw the Saint over the
mantelpiece she cried, and blasted the war that 
made it necessary to wear them . . respirators !
all over (the Saint is in armour),-and when
she saw the flowers, she laughed, and said it
seemed like Nothing-on-Earth to have Dusty'
away.
~m



<pb n="63"/>
Oh, bend your eyes, nor send your glance about.
Oh, watch your feet, nor stray beyond the kerb.
Oh, bind your heart lest it find secrets out.
For thus no punishment
Of magic shall disturb
Your very great content.
Oh, shut your lips to words that are forbidden.
Oh, throw away your sword, nor think to fight.
Seek not the best, the best is better hidden.
Thus need you have no fear,
No terrible delight
Shall cross your path, my dear.
Call no man foe, but never love a stranger.
Build up no plan, nor any star pursue.
Go forth with crowds; in loneliness is danger.
Thus nothing Fate can send,
And nothing Fate can do
Shall pierce your peace, my friend.
63



<pb n="64"/>



<pb n="65"/>
CHRISTINA the motor car started next morn-
ing. She set her tyres on the road to the
Secret World. For all the cues that Jay
provided pointed to that region.
"Here is another letter from Jay," said
Mrs. Gustus as they started, "bristling with
clues. Odd, under the circumstances, that
she writes to me so often and so freely. I
will read you some of it, but not all, until I
have thought my suspicions over. She writes:
... A collision with the Law to-night, under a
great sunset. It would have been rather silly by
common daylight, but under a yellow sky with stars
in it, I think nothing can live but romance. The
tide was coming up, and the Law-a man with a
tall and dewy brow-rowed up to the foot of our
little ladder that leads to the sea. ... You know
those round stone balls that sit on the balustrades of
formal gardens such as this . . . we only meant
to frighten the Law, a splash was all that we in- 
tended, but the sun was in my Friend's eyes as he
6s4              F



<pb n="66"/>
THIS IS THE END                  |
dropped the ball. It struck the bow of the boat, '
which went under like a frightened porpoise. There 
were two men in it, besides the Law itself, and they 5
all came up spitting and spouting, and stood up to 
their necks in water. Oaths bubbled up to us. 
The boat came up badly perforated, and I expect
we shall get into trouble. It was funny, but the
War has rather pacified us peace-time belligerents, '
and made people like me unused to collisions with 
authority. I felt very nervous, but it was all right 
because ... 
I will read you no more, but in that
much there should be several clues. We 
must keep the western sun in our eyes to 
begin with."
"We must look out for a householder of
irregular-not to say murderous-habits,"
said Cousin Gustus.    "Juggling with stone
balls  a trick that is frequently fatal. Nobody
but Jay would encourage it."
"We must-comb out all western seaside
resorts for local police with tall and dewy
brOws,"' aid Kew.
But Mr. Russell, who preferred not to '
speak ad drive Christina at the same time, I
drew up to the kerb, and removed his gloves, 
preparatory to say    somthing Sm of importance. 



<pb n="67"/>
THIS IS THE END
Mr. Russell was at his best in a car, or, to
put it another way, he was at his worst every-
where else.  When he and Christina went
r      out together they were only one entity.
They were a centaur on wheels; Mr. Russell
could feel the rushing of the road beneath his
tyres, and I think if you had stuck a pin into
the back seat, Mr. Russell would have known
it. You could feel now the puzzled growl of
Christina's engines as Mr. Russell pondered.
' But I remember . ." said Mr. Russell.
"Now, did I see it in the paper . .? I
remember.... Half a minute, it is coming
back."
"Here's to-day's paper," said Kew, who
was getting a little confused. You will feel
the same when you set out to follow the
western sun in search of something you know
you have left behind you.
Mr. Russell and Christina lingered beside
the kerb for quite a minute, and then shrugged
-   their shoulders and started again.
So the Family set their faces towards the
Secret World, with Mr. Russell as their guide,
and the morning sun behind them.
London is a friend whom    I can leave
67



<pb n="68"/>
THIS IS THE END
knowing without doubt that she will be the
same to me when I return, to-morrow or forty
years hence, and that, if I do not return, she
will sing the same song to inheritors of my
happy lot in future generations. Always,
whether sleeping or waking, I shall know
that in Spring the sun rides over the silver
streets of Kensington, and that in the Gardens
the shorn sheep find very green pasture.
Always the plaited threads of traffic will wind
about the reel of London; always as you go
up Regent Street from Pall Mall and look
back, Westminster will rise with you like a
dim sun over the horizon of Whitehall. That
dive down Fleet Street and up to the black
and white cliffs of St. Paul's will for ever
bring to mind some rumour of romance.
There is always a romance that we leave
behind in London, and always London en-
locks that flower for us, and keeps it fresh,
so that when we come back we have our
romance again.
Mr. Russell was a lover of London, and
that is why he liked his new-found 'bus-
conductor. He was an uncalculating sort of
man, and he only thought that he had foutd
&R



<pb n="69"/>
THIS IS THE END
a flower in London, a very London flower,
and he hoped that London would show it to
him again. He had no instinct either for the
past or the future. He never looked back
over the road he had trod, unless he was
obliged to, and he never tried to look forward
to the end of the road he was treading.
Mrs. Gustus, with an iron expression about
her chin, kept time to the beat of Christina's
engine with the throbbing of disagreeable
thoughts.  There was one thing very plain
to her in the matter of Jay-that Jay was
living a life that in a novel is called free, but
in a Family-well-you know what. ..
Mrs. Gustus knew all about these Friends
with capital F's, Friends with hair flopping
over their foreheads, Friends who might drop
stone balls on the Law and still retain their
capital F's. She had, in fact, written about
them with much daring and freedom. But
one's young relations may never share the
privileges of one's heroines. Sympathy with
such goings on must be confined to the
printed page.
-  I will keep these things from the others,"
jthought Mrs. Gustus.    "They have no



<pb n="70"/>
THIS IS THE END
suspicions, and if we can find Jay I may be
able to save her reputation yet."
Really she was thinking as much of her
own good name as of Jay's. For there was
a most, irritating similarity between Jay's
present apparent practices and Mrs. Gustus's
own much-expressed theories.  The beauty
of a free life of simplicity had filled pages of
Anonyma's notebooks, and also, to the annoy-
ance of Cousin Gustus, had overflowed into
her conversation. Cousin Gustus's memory
bad been constantly busy extracting from
the past moral tales concerning the disasters
attendant on excessive simplicity in human
relationships. For a time it had seemed as
if Cousin Gustus's lot had been cast entirely
with the matrimonially unorthodox.   And
now Mrs. Gustus, for one impatient minute,
wished that the children would pay more
attention to their elderly and experienced
guardian. It was too much to ask her--a
professional theory-maker-to   adapt her
theories to the young and literal. That was
the worst of Jay, she was so literal, so un-
imaginative, so lacking in the simple un-
.*  .    .  r    _    T       _   .   -



<pb n="71"/>
THIS IS THE END
word to the others.  Jay's reputation and
Anonyma's dignity might yet be saved.
"I don't know where we are going," said
Anonyma presently. "I have no bump of
locality."
She always spoke proudly of her failings,
as though there were a rapt press interviewer
at her elbow, anxious to make a word-vignette
about her.
Mr. Russell was thinking, and Kew was
singing, so between them they forgot to shape
the course of Christina due west. When they
got outside London, they found themselves
going south.
; -    To go out of London was like going out
of doors. The beauty of London is a dim
beauty, and while you are in the middle of it
you forget what it is like to see things dearly.
In London every hour is a hill of adventure,
and in the country every hour is a dimple in
a quiet expanse of time.
The Family went out over the hills of
Surrey, and between roadside trees they saw the
crowned heads of the seaward downs. The
horizon sank lower around them, the fields and
woods circled and squared the ribs of the land.



<pb n="72"/>
THIS IS THE END
Before sunset they had reached the little
town that guards the gate in the wall of the
Sussex downs. They were welcomed by a
thunderstorm, and by passionate rain that
drove them to the inn. Christina, torn
between her pride of soul and her pride of
paint, was obliged to edge herself into a shed
which already occupied by two cows and
a red ad blue waggon
yi  hen the pursuers of Jay set their feet
uneven floor of the inn, they recognised
the place immediately as ideal. Its windows
squinted, its floor made you feel as though
you were drunk, its banisters reeled, its flights
of stairs looked frequently round in an
d:?    angular way at their own beginnings.
"How Arcadian!" said Mrs. Gustus, as
she splashed her signature into the visitor's
book. "One could be content to vegetate
for dver here. Isn't it pathetic how one
spends one's life collecting heart's desires,
until one suddenly discovers that in having
nothing and in desiring nothing lies happiness."
But when they had been shown their
sitting-room, and had ordered their supper-
lamb and early peas and gooseberry tart with



<pb n="73"/>
THIS IS THE END
oAs of cream-Mrs. Gustus saw the Ring,
that great green breast of the country, against
the broken evening sky, and said, "Now I
see heights, and I shall never be happy or
hungry till I have climbed them. The Lord
made me so that I am never content until I
nam as near the sky as possible. Silly, no
.doubt  But what a sky! Blood-red and
_   ip e pink, what a unique chord of colour."
_1:.; "Same chord as the livery of the Bank or
land," said Kew, who was hungry, and
_      ;. an aching shoulder. He hated beauty
_  j     ,.IIjsMt as he hated poetry forced into
_  b    iHjltgO| nothing. Even to hear the
. to make him blush,
hardened him.
the lamb and goose-
coming; she placed
m-chair, first wrapping
felt cold, and then
because he felt hot;
_  l^^^^^^^      ' mnore than an hour," she
Gxustus said an hour, she
.b  e had meant an hour, she
_~?^^       H     .~~<twenty minutes.  "You



<pb n="74"/>
THIS IS THE END
must watch for us to appear on the highest
point of the Ring."
"Don't watch, but pray," murmured Kew.
"There's that thunderstorm just working up
to another display."
And so it was, but when they reached the
ridge of down that led to the Ring, they were
glad they had come. They were half-
drowned, and half-blinded, and half-deafened,
but there is a reward to every effort. There
was an enormous sky, and the sunlight
spilled between the clouds to fall in pools
upon the world. There was a chord made by
many larks in the sky; the valleys held joy
as a cup holds water. From the down the
chalk-pits took great bites; the crinolined
trees curtseyed down the slopes. The happy-
coloured sea cut the world in half; the sight
of a distant town at the corner of the river
and the coast made one laugh for pleasure.
There was a boat with sunlit sails creeping
across the sea. I never see a boat on an
utterly lonely sea without thinking of the '
secret stories that it carries, of the sun moving 
round that private world, of the shadows -
upon the deck that I cannot see, of the song '
P.



<pb n="75"/>
THIS IS THE END
of passing seas that I cannot hear, of the
night coming   across a great horizon to
devour it when I shall have forgotten it.
Further off and moresuggestive than a star,
it seems to me.
A gust of sunlight struck the watchers,
and passed: they each ran a few steps towards
the sight that pleased them most. And then
they stood so long that Mr. Russell's Hound
had time to make himself acquainted with
every smell within twenty yards. He turned
over a snail that sat-round and striped like
a peppermint bull's-eye-on the short grass,
he patted a little beetle that pushed its way
across a world of disproportionate size, and
then, by peevishly pulling the end of his
whip which hung from Mr. Russell's pensive
hand, he suggested that the pursuit should
continue. So they walked to the crest of
, wood that stands at the top of the Ring, a
i compressed tabloid forest, fifty yards from
side to side, as round as a florin piece.
*   The slopes rushed away from every side
' of it.' There was a dark secret beneath those
trees, there was a hint of very ancient love
K: and still more ancient hatred. You could



<pb n="76"/>
THIS IS THE END
feel things beyond understanding, you left
fact outside under the sky, and went in with
a naked soul.
They walked across it in silence, well
apart from each other. When they came out
the other side, Mrs. Gustus said, "We must
stay for a little while within reach of this.
It has something . . ."
Mr. Russell swallowed something that he
had thought of saying, and instead drew his
, *Hound's attention to a yellow square of
itstard-field which made brilliant the distance.
Kew said nothing, but he felt choked
with a lost remembranceof a very old child-
hood. He seemed to taste the quiet taste of
youth here, there was even a feeling of going
home through a damp evening to a nursery
tea. It was the nursery of all Secret Worlds.
Gods had been born there. No surprise
could live there now, no wonder, no protest.
The years like minutes fled between those
trees, dynasties might fall during the singing
of a bird. I think the thing that haunted
the wood was a thing exactly as old and as
romantic as the first child that tracked its
Secret Friend across the floor of a forest.



<pb n="77"/>
t~I THIS IS THE END
Oh, friend of childlike mind, what is it
that these two years have taken from us,
what is it that we have lost, oh friend, besides
contentment ?
All the way home Kew sang very loudly
the first tune he ever knew.
When the Family (including Mr. Russell)
got back to the inn, the lamb and the goose-
berry tart and Cousin Gustus were all waiting
i ,  r them. But they were delayed in the hall.
::A stout young woman with a pleasant face of
^mall vocabulary turned from the visitors'
ook and stopped Mrs. Gustus.
!  "Are you THE Mrs. Augustus Martin? "
ahe asked.
"I am    she," replied Anonyma.   Her
grammar in moments of emergency always
'; impressed Kew.
I  I cannot say that Mrs. Gustus seemed sur-
rised. She was the sort of person to hide
n from herself the fact that this thing had
er happened before. She remained per-
fictly calm as if repeating a hackneyed ex-
perience. Kew was astonished. Mr. Russell
o hared this feeling. Having a certain personal
i admiration for Mrs. Gustus, he had tried on
77



<pb n="78"/>
THIS IS THE END
more than one occasion to find pleasure in her
books, but without success.
The stoutyounglady said nothing more than
"Oh " for the moment, but she breathed it in
such a manner that Mrs. Gustus saw at once
the duty of asking her to dine with the Family.
When the admirer was introduced to
Cousin Gustus, she said, " Oh, so this is your
husband ... "and gazed on that melancholy
man with eagerness. When she saw Mr.
Russell's Hound she said, "And this is your
dog," and was about to crown him with
a corresponding halo when Mrs. Gustus
disclaimed the connection.
" It is wonderful to meet you, of all people,
in this romantic place," said the admirer as
she pursued her peas. "Do you know, when-
ever I finish one of your books, I feel so
romantic I want to kiss everybody I meet.
Oh, those courtly heroes of yours !"
A heavy silence fell for a moment.
"And your descriptions of nature," con- 
tinued the admirer. " That sunset seen from
the west coast of Ireland that you describe.
in The Courtship of Hartley Casey. You must,
know Ireland very well." 
98                    !



<pb n="79"/>
THIS IS THE END
"I have never been there," said Mrs.
Gustus. "I evolve my scenery. After all,
Nature lives in the heart of each one of us.
I think we all have a sort of Secret World of
our own, out of which all that is best in us
comes. One does not need to see with one's
outward eyes."
" Oh, goodness me, how true that is," said
the admirer. "But you must write a book
about the downs, won't you ? Do you take
notes on your travels ?"
"' My notebook is never out of my hand,"
answered Mrs. Gustus. " I jot down what-
ever occurs to me, wherever I may be. I
write by moonlight in the night, I have had
to pause in the middle of my prayers in
Church, I have stood transfixed in the full
flow of a London street. I always hope that
I   people will think I am suddenly remembering
H  that I forgot to order to-morrow's dinner."
L[;   But really she knew that no one could ever
[ be deceived in the purpose of the notebook.
* "Oh, mustn't it be wonderful! " breathed
- tthe admirer, and Cousin Gustus, who was
always properly impressed by his wife when
:the example was set by strangers, nodded with
79



<pb n="80"/>
THIS IS THE END
a proprietary smile. "And are you writing
now ? " she continued.
"I am always writing," said Mrs. Gustus,
who had seldom enjoyed herself so much,
"my pen never rests.   A  lifetime is too
short to allow of rest. But I am not here
primarily for inspiration. We are on a quest."
"Oh, how romantic," moaned the admirer.
"It is a quest with a certain amount of
romance in it," agreed Anonyma. "We are
seeking a House By The Sea. We know
very little about it except that it exists. We
know that its windows look west, and that the
sun sets over the sea. We know that it stands
ungardened on the cliff and has a great view.
We know that it is seven hundred years old,
and full of inspiration ..."
"We know," continued Kew, " that you
can-and often do-drop a fishing-line out of
the window into the sea when you are tired
of playing the goldfish in the water-butt.
We know that the owner of the house is a
rotten shot, and that the stone balls from the
balustrade are not at this moment where they
ought to be. We know that aeroplanes as
well as seagulls nest in those cliffs ...."
so



<pb n="81"/>
!»'.  -  .', .,"  t. ' 1,  J i':  . ' . . ; .'  <" (  rJ  I  -  (
THIS 18 TIE END
" We know-         " began Mr. Russell, but
;    this was too much for Mrs. Gustus. After
all, the lady was her admirer.
"What's all this?" said Mrs. Gustus.
" sWhat do you people know about it?"
"I just thought I would talk a little now,"
.    aid Kew. "I get quickly tired of hearing
other people giving information without help
it  from me."
. ~:^  At any rate, Russ," continued Mrs.
J iy0ou can't know anything whatever
'l ater. You have hardly listened
ay's letters."
that I remembered," said Mr.
"'"t know how. I remember
t^ff and seeing three black
R *iow., and dive in a row, and
a row come up aain after I had counted
::: "Nonaeese," said Mrs. Gustus, trying not
to appear cross before the visitor, "you're
:dnking of something else. You can see
much a sight as that at the Zoo any day."
^  "You all seem to know quite a lot about
the place," said the admirer, " yet not much
/:a very practical nature, if I may say so." 
It r



<pb n="82"/>
1   ;     ' , '.!/ : I !  f· Ir '
THIS IS THE END 
"Everything practical is unromantic," 
said Mrs. Gustus. "There is nothing true-i
or beautiful in the world but poetry. If we-l
seek in real simplicity of mind, we shall find"' 
what we seek, for simplicity is poetry, and 
poetry is truth."
"Also, of course, England has only one 
west coast," added Kew, "and if we don't 
find the place we shall have found a good 
many other things by the time we have 3
finished."
"It may be in Ireland," suggested the
admirer.
"No, because she answers our letters so
quickly."
"She?"
"My young cousin, the object of our
search."
" Did she run away ?" asked the admirer,
in a voice strangled with excitement.
To admit that a young relation of
Anonyma's should run away from her would
be undignifie4
"You mustn't take us too seriously," said
Mrs. Gustus lightly. "It isn't a case of an
elopement, or anything like that.  Just an
Ro



<pb n="83"/>
THIS IS THE END
excuse for a tour, and a rest from wearisome
war work. A wild-goose chase, nothing but
fun in it."
" Wild goose is a good description of Jay,"
said Cousin Gustus. It was rather.
Next morning the admirer, twittering with
excitement, came in upon the Family while
it was having its breakfast.
"Oh, I had such an idea in the night,"
she said. " I couldn't sleep, of course, after
such an exciting day. I believe I have been
fated to help you in your quest. I know of a
house near here, and the more I think of it the
more sure I feel that it is the place you want."
"Who lives there?"
"A young man with his mother. I forget
the name."
"Place we want's west," objected Mr.
Russell.
"You never can tell," said Anonyma.
"This place may stand on a salient, facing
west. Our search must be thorough."
"It's such a lovely walk," said the admirer.
"I should be so much honoured if you would
let me show you the way. Oh, I say, do you
think me very presumptuous ? "



<pb n="84"/>
THIS IS THE END ,
/     Her self-consciousness took the form of a
constant repentance. In the night she would
go over her day and probe it for tender
points. "Oh, that was a dreadful thing to
say," was a refrain that would keep her awake
for hours, wriggling and giggling in her bed
over the dreadfulness of it. She had too
little egoism. The lack gave her face a look
of littleness. A lack of altruism has the same
outward effect. A complete face should be
full of something, of gentleness, of vigour, of
humour, of wickedness. The admirer's face
was only half full of anything. All the same
there was charm about her, the fact that she
was an admirer was charming. Mrs. Gustus
reassured her.
"We shall be most grateful for a guide.'
"We should be even more grateful for
an excuse to call on this inoffensive young
man and his mother at eleven o'clock in the
morning," objected Kew.
"He ought to be at the Front," was the
excuse provided by Cousin Gustus.
"So ought I," sighed Kew.
"Oh, but you're a wounded, aren't you ?"
asked the admirer. There were signs of a



<pb n="85"/>
THIS IS THE END
possible transfer of admiration, and Mrs.
Gustus interposed with presence of mind.
"We'll start," she said. "Don't let's be
hampered in the beginning of our quest by
social littleness."
She was conscious that she looked handsome
enough for any breach of convention. She
wore an unusual shaped dress the colour of
vanilla ice. Instead of doing her hair as usual
in one severe penny bun at the back, she had
constructed a halfpenny bun, so to speak,
over each ear. This is a very literary way
of doing the hair, and the remembrance of
the admirer, haunting Anonyma's waking
thoughts, had inspired the change.
Their way lay through the beechwood that
embroiders the hem  of the down's cloak.
There are only two colours in a beechwood
after rain, lilac and green. A bank of violets
is not more pure in colour than a beech trunk
shining in the sun. The two colours answered
one another, fainter and fainter, away and
away, to the end of one's sight, and there were
two cuckoos, hidden in the dream, mocking
each other in velvet voices.   The view
between the trees was made up of horizons



<pb n="86"/>
THIS IS THE END
that tilted one's chin.  The bracken, very
young, on an opposite slope, was like a cloud
of green wings alighting. But the look of
their destination disappointed them.
"This house faces south," said Kew.
"I feel sure-" began Mr. Russell, but
Mrs. Gustus said:
"As we are here, we might ask. To be
sure, the cliff is rather tame."
"But there is an aeroplane," persisted the
admirer.
"Now   pause, Anonyma," Kew     warned
her.  "Pause and consider what you are
going to say."
" Consideration only unearths difficulties,"
laughed Anonyma.     "Best go forward in
faith and fearlessness."
She was under the impression that she
constantly laughed in a nicely naughty way
at Kew's excessive conventionality.
As they drew nearer to the cliff, it grew
tamer and tamer.   The house, too, became
dangerously like a villa; a super-villa, to be
sure, and not in its first offensive youth, but
still closely connected with the villa tribe.
Its complexion was a bilious yellow, and it



<pb n="87"/>
THIS IS THE END
had red-rimmed windows.    It was close to
the sea, however, and its windows, with their
blinds drawn down against the sun, looked
like eyes downcast towards the beach.
There was no lodge, and the Family walked
in silence through the gate.  Mr. Russell's
Hound went first with a defiant expression
about his tail.  That expression cost him
dear.     Inside the gate there stood a large
vulgar dog, without a tail to speak of. Its
parting was crooked, its hair was in its eyes.
All these personal disadvantages the Familyhad
time to note, while the dog gazed incredulously
at Mr. Russell's Hound.
A Pekinese dog never wears country
clothes. It always looks as if it had its silk
hat and spats on. If I were a country dog,
who had never even smelt a Piccadilly smell,
I should certainly bite all dogs of the type of
Mr. Russell's Hound.
I could hardly describe what followed as a
fight. Although I have always loved stories
of giant-killers, from David downwards, and
should much like to write one, I cannot in
this case pretend that Mr. Russell's Hound
did anything but call for help. Anonyma's



<pb n="88"/>
THIS IS THE END
umbrella, Kew's cane, and Mr. Russell's stick
did all they could towards making peace, but
the big dog seemed to have set itself the un-
kind task of mopping up a puddle with Mr.
Russell's Hound. The process took a con-
siderable time. And it was never finished,
for the mistress of the house interrupted it.
She was rather a fat person, apparently
possessing the gift of authority, for the sound
of her call reached her dog through the noise
of battle. He saw that his aim was not one
to achieve in the presence of an audience.
He disengaged his teeth from the mane of
Mr. Russell's Hound.
"Is your dog much hurt?" asked the
mistress of the house, and handed Anonyma
a slate.
Anonyma scanned this unexpected gift
nervously. She was much more used to
taking other people aback than to being taken
aback herself. But Kew was more ready.
He dived for the pencil and wrote, " Only a
bit punctured," on the slate.
"You'd better bring it in and bathe it,"
suggested the lady, when she had studied this.
They followed her in silent single file.



<pb n="89"/>
THIS IS THE END
Anonyma noticed that her hair was apparently
done in imitation of a pigeon's nest, also that
many hooks at the back of her dress had lost
their grip of the situation.
The bathroom, whither Mr. Russell's
Hound was carried, was suggestive of another
presence in the house. A boat, called Golden
Mary, was navigating the bath. There were
some prostrate soldiers and chessmen in a little
heap on the ledge, apparently waiting for a
passage.
" I'm getting out my son's things because
he is coming home," said the lady.
Mr. Russell was. bathing his bleeding
Hound in the basin, and Anonyma was at
the window, ostentatiously drinking in the
view. Kew took the slate and wrote politely
on it: "From school ?"
"From the War," said the lady.
Kew donned a pleased and interested ex-
pression. It seemed to him better to do this
than to write, "Really 1" on the slate.
"He wrote about a fortnight ago," the
lady's harsh voice continued, "to say he
would come to-day. He said he was sick of
being grown-up, he told me to get out the



<pb n="90"/>
THIS IS THE END
soldiers and the Golden Mary. He wants to
launch them on the pond again."
Kew nodded. " I have felt like that," he
murmured, and the lady seemed to see the
sense of his words.
"I should think you are six years older
than Murray," she said, "and very different.
Come out into the garden, and I'll show you."
Kew followed her, and Anonyma, after a
moment's hesitation, went too.  But Mr.
Russell, who had finished his work of mercy,
seemed to think it better to linger in the
bathroom, explaining to his Hound the subject
of a Biblical picture which hung over the bath.
" You might think I was rather too old to
play things well," the mother said to Kew.
" But you should see me with Murray. Even
my deafness never hindered me with him, I
could always see what he said.  Look, we
made this road for the soldiers coming down
to the wharf. Do you see the way we helped
nature, by tampering with the roots of the
beech. It is a perfect wharf, this little flat
bit, it is just level with the deck of the boat
at high tide.  The lower wharf is for low
tide. but of course we have to Dretend the



<pb n="91"/>
THIS IS THE END
tides. That round place is the bandstand, and
there the pipers play when there is a troop-
ship starting. Sometimes only the Favourite
Piper plays, striding up and down the little
bowling-green at the top here, but not often,
because the work of keeping him going inter-
feres with the disembarkation. We never let
the Highlanders go abroad, because Murray
loves them so. He is afraid lest something
should happen to them. Were the Highlanders
your favourites? "
Kew wrote on the slate: "No, the Egyptian
Camel Corps."
The lady nodded. "We loved them too,
but of course they lived on the other side of
the pond, and sometimes they and the Sepoys
and the Soudanese had to insurrect. Some-
body had to, you know, but we regretted the
Egyptian Camel Corps awfully. I hope you
don't think us silly. . . . Murray was always
a childish person. I hope I am too. The
bowling-green gave us a lot of trouble to
make; it is nice and flat, isn't it ? We trim
it with nail-scissors."
It was a good bowling-green, about twelve
inches by six. There were some marbles on it.



<pb n="92"/>
THIS IS THE END
"It has historical associations," said the
mother of Murray. "It was here that Drake
played when the Armada was sighted. Of
course that was before our time, but some-
times, on a moonlit summer night, we used
to lie down on our fronts and see his little
ghost haunting the green. We used to bring
our young sailors here, and inspire them with
stories about Drake. The sailors used to
stand on the green, and we put up railings
made of matches all round, and civilians used
to stand in great breathless crowds outside
the railings watching. Chessmen, of course.
Murray used to make the civilians arrive in
motors, so as to make ruts in the road. Some-
how it was always rather splendid and real to
have ruts in the road."
There was a long pause.
"Later on, of course, things got more
grown-up. The last time we played before
the War-when War was already in sight-
we shipped an unprecedented mass of troops
to that peninsula, and had a wonderful battle
You can still see the trenches and gunt emplace-
ments; I cleared them out yesterday. Murray
joined the Army in that first August, an,



<pb n="93"/>
THIS IS THE END
whenever he came home after that he was
somehow ashamed of these things. I quite
understood that.  When I am   having tea
with the Vicar's wife, or cutting out shirts for
the soldiers, I sometimes blush a little to think
how old I am, and to think of the things I
do at home with Murray. I am sure he
felt just the same when he was with other
men. But his last letter was young again.
He wrote that the War should cease the
moment he set foot inside this gate, and we
would have a civilian game, an alpine expedi-
tion up the mountains. You see the beech-
root mountains.  There is the cave where
we put up for the night. There is a wonder
ful view from Bumpy Peak, over the sea, and
right away to far-off lands. Murray thought
that when the expedition had caught a chamois
it might turn into engineers prospecting for
the building of a road up to Bumpy Peak, so
that the soldiers might march up, and look
out over the sea, and see-very far off-the
fringes of the East that they had conquered,
when they were young and not tired of
War.. .."
She broke off and looked at Kew.
01



<pb n="94"/>
THIS IS THE END
Anonyma stood a few paces away, gazing at
her vanilla-ice reflection in the pond.
"I dare say you think us silly," said the
lady. "I dare say you would think Murray
a rotter if you met him. It doesn't matter
much. It doesn't matter at all. Nothing
matters, because he will come home to-night."
Kew fidgeted a moment, and then took
the slate and wrote: "I am very much afraid
that all leave from abroad has been stopped
this week."
"Yes, I know," said the mother, "I have
been unhappy about that for some days.
But it doesn't make any difference to Murray
now. You see, I heard last night that he
was killed on Tuesday. That's why I know
he will come, and I shall be waiting here.
Can't you imagine them shouting as they get
through, as they get through with being
grown-up, shouting to each other as they
run back to their childhood and their old
pretences . .
After a moment she added, "That is the
only sound that I shall ever hear now,-the
shouting of Murray to me as he runs home."
It was in a sort of dream that Kew
nA



<pb n="95"/>
THIS IS THE END
watched Anonyma go forward and take both
the hands of the mother. I suppose he knew
that all that was superfluous, and that
Murray would come home.
Anonyma said, "I am so sorry.  I am
so sorry that we intruded.   You must
forgive us."
The mother of Murray did not hear, but
she saw that sympathy was intended, and
she nodded awkwardly, and a little severely.
I don't think she had known that Anonyma
was there.
Kew was not sorry that he had intruded.
95



<pb n="96"/>
r.
i:
I
:i
r'
d
-i
i
.d
i
''
·,
1
1



<pb n="97"/>
AT sunset, when the high sea span
About the rocks a web of foam,
I saw the ghost of a Cornishman
Come home.
I saw the ghost of a Cornishman
Run from the weariness of War,
I heard him laughing as he ran
Across his unforgotten shore.
The great cliff, gilded by the west,
Received him as an honoured guest.
The green sea, shining in the bay,
Did drown his dreadful yesterday.
Come home, come home, you million ghosts,
The honest years shall make amends,
The sun and moon shall be your hosts,
The everlasting hills your friends.
And some shall seek their mothers' faces,
And some shall run to trysting-places,
And some to towns, and others yet
Shall find great forests in their debt.
Oh, I would siege the golden coasts
Of space, and climb high heaven's dome,
So I might see those million ghosts
Come home.
97                 H



<pb n="98"/>



<pb n="99"/>
NEXT day all the Family, including Mr.
Russell and excepting Cousin Gustus, came
to breakfast with the intention of announcing
that he or she must go up to London by the
next train. Mrs. Gustus, as ever, spoke first.
"My conscience is pricking me.   My
work is calling me. I must go up and see
my old darlings in the Brown Borough.
There is, I see, a train at ten."
" I was just going to say something quite
different to the same effect," said Kew. "I
want to go up and whisper some secrets into
the ear of Cox. I want to have my hair cut.
I want to buy this week's Punch. I want
some brown bootlaces. Life is empty for me
unless I go up to town this morning."
Mr. Russell, although he had tried the
effect ot all his excuses on his Hound while
dressing, was silent.
Mrs. Gustus was never less than half an
99



<pb n="100"/>
THIS IS THE END
hour too early for trains.    This might
account for the excellence of her general
information. She had spent a large portion
of her life at railway stations, which are, I
think, the centre of much wisdom. She and
Kew started for the station with mouths
burnt by hurried coffee and toast-crumbs still
unbrushed on their waistcoats, forty minutes
before the train was due. The protests of
Kew could be heard almost as far as the
station, which was reached by a walk of five
minutes.
Cousin Gustus, Mr. Russell, and the
convalescent Hound went to lie upon the
downs which climbed up straight from the
back doorstep of the, inn.    They were
accompanied by a rug, a scarf, a sunshade, an
overcoat, the blessings of the landlady, and
Cousin Gustus's diary. Nobody ever knew
what sort of matter filled Cousin Gustus's
diary, nobody ever wanted to know. It gave
him grounds for claiming literary tastes, and
his literary tastes presumably made him marry .
a literary wife. So the diary had a certain 
importance. 
They spread out the rug in a little hollow,
o00



<pb n="101"/>
THIS IS THE END
like a giant's footprint in the downs, and
sheep and various small flowers looked over
their shoulders.
For the first ten minutes Mr. Russell lay
on his back listening to the busy sound of
the bees filling their honeybags, and the sheep
filling themselves, and Cousin Gustus filling
his diary.  He watched the rooks travel
across the varied country of the sky. He
watched a little black and white bird that
danced in the air to the tune of its own very
high and flippant song. He watched the
sun ford a deep and foaming cloud. And all
the time he remembered many reasons why
it would have been nice to go up to London.
Oddly enough, a 'bus-conductor seemed to
stand quite apart from these reasons in the
back of his mind for several minutes. One
would hardly have believed that a 'bus-
conductor could have held her own so long
in the mind of a person like Mr. Russell.
And Providence finally ordained that he
should feel in his cigarette case and find it
empty.
"No cigarettes," said Mr. Russell, after pon-
dering for a moment on this disappointment.
IOI



<pb n="102"/>
THIS IS THE END
"You smoke too much," said Cousin
Gustus. "I once knew a man who over-
smoked all his life, and when he got a bullet
in his lung in the Zulu War he died, simply
as the result of his foolishness. No recupera-
tive power. They said his lungs were simply
leather."
"Should have thought that would've been
a protection," said Mr. Russell.
"The train is not even signalled yet," said
Cousin Gustus. "You would have time to
go to the station and tell Kew to get you
some cigarettes."
But this was not Providence's intention, as
interpreted by Mr. Russell. "D'you know,
I half believe I'll go up too," he said.
"Would you be lonely? "
"Not in the least," said Cousin Gustus
pathetically; " I'm used to being left alone."
As the signals dropped Mr. Russell sprang
to his feet and ran down the slope. He had
country clothes on, and some thistledown and
a sprig or two of clover were sticking to them.
He reached the station in time, and fell over
a crate of hens. The hens were furious about
it, and said so. Mr. Russell said nothing,



<pb n="103"/>
THIS IS THE END
but he felt hurt when the porter who opened
the door for him asked if the hens were his.
After the train had started he wished he had
had time to tell the porter how impossible it
was that a man who owned a crate full of hens
should fall over it. And then he thought
that would have been neither witty nor con-
vincing. He was one of those lucky people
who say so little that they rarely have need to
regret what they have said.
The business that dragged him so precipi-
tately from the country must, I suppose, have
been very urgent. It chanced that it lay at
Ludgate Circus, and it also chanced-not in
the least unnaturally-that at half-past eleven
he was standing at Kensington Church waiting
to be beckoned to once more by a 'bus-con-
ductor. The only unnatural thing was that
several 'buses bound for Ludgate Circus passed
without winning the patronage of Mr. Russell.
The conductor came. Mr. Russell saw
her round face and squared hair appear out of
the confusion of the street. He noticed with
surprise that he had not borne in mind the
pleasing way in which the strap of her hat
tilted her already tilted chin.
103



<pb n="104"/>
THIS IS THE END
ay had been thinking a little about Mr.
ussell, not much. She had been wondering
who he was. The Family's friends and rela-
tions were always much talked of in the 
Family, and much invited, and much met.
Mr. Russell had not been among them when
Jay had last known the Family. An idea was
in her mind that he might be a private detec-
tive, engaged by the Family to seek out their
fugitive young relation. Mr. Russell had
plainly alluded to a search. Jay had no ex-
perience of private detectives, but she thought
it quite possible that they might disguise
themselves with rather low foreheads, and
rather frowning eyes, and shut thin mouths,
and shut thin expressions. She hoped that
she would see him to-day. An hour ago a
young man with a spotty complexion and
bulging eyes like a rabbit's had handed her a
note with his threepence, asking for a "two-
and-a-half" in a lovelorn voice. She handed
him back his halfpenny and his unopened note
at once, saying, "Your change, sir," in a kind,
absent-minded voice. I am afraid an incident
like this is always a little exciting, though I
admit it ought to be insulting. That sugges-
IOA



<pb n="105"/>
THIS IS THE END
tive fare made Jay hope more and more that
she would meet Mr. Russell to-day. I don't
exactly know why, except that sentimentality
is an infectious complaint.
ifr. Russell got happily into the 'bus.
He made the worst entrance possible. His
hat slipped crooked, he left one leg behind on
the road, and only retrieved it with the help
of the conductor. Jay welcomed him with a
nod that was almost a bow, a remnant of her
unprofessional past.
"Told you I'd come in this 'bus again,"
said Mr. Russell, sitting down in the left-hand
seat next to the door. I really don't know
what would have happened if that seat had
been occupied. I suppose Mr. Russell would
have sat upon the occupier.
"A good many people like this service,"
said Jay; "it is considered very convenient.
How is your search going ? "
"It hasn't begun yet," said Mr. Russell.
"We haven't got within three hundred miles
of the House we're looking for."
"You know more or less where it is,
then ?" asked Jay, who sometimes wanted to
know this herself.
ION



<pb n="106"/>
THIS IS THE END
"I do know, but I don't know how I
know, nor what I know."
"How funny that you-an Older and
Wiser Man-should feel that sort of know-
ledge," said Jay. As an afterthought she
called him Sir.
The 'bus grew fuller, and only Jay's bell
punctured the silence that followed. A lady
asked Jay to " set her down at Charing Cross
Post Office."  "The 'bus stops there auto-
matically, Madam," said Jay, and the lady
told her not to be impertinent.
Jay seemed a little subdued after this, and
it was only after she had stood for a minute
or two on her platform in silence that she said
to Mr. Russell, "London seems dead to-day,
doesn't it? Not even fog, only a lifeless
light. What's the use of daylight in London
to-day ? You know, I don't live in London."
" No," said Mr. Russell, "where do you
live ?"
"London," replied Jay. "I mean my
heart doesn't live in London mostly. I think
it lives very far away in the same sort of place
as the place you know without knowing how
you know it. The happy shore of God
Io6



<pb n="107"/>
THIS IS THE END
Knows Where must have a great population
of hearts. To-day I hate London so that I
could tear it into pieces like a rag."
"You ought to start your 'bus on the
search for the happy shore," said Mr. Russell.
"You'd find the track of my tyres before
you. I b'lieve you'd find the place."
"Well, that would be the only perfect
Service," said Jay.  "But I don't believe
the public would use the route much. I
would go on and on, and leave all old ruts
behind. I would stop for no fares, even the
sea should not stop me. I would go on to
the horizon to see if that secret look just after
sunset really means that the stars are just over
the brink. Why do people end themselves
on a note of despair ? I would choose that
way of perpetuating my Perfect Day. The
police would see the top seats of the 'bus
sticking out at low tide, and the verdict
would be, 'Suicide while of even more than
usually unsound mind.'"
A 'bus has an unromantic voice. The bass
is a snarl, and the treble is made up of a shrill
rattle. It was curious how this 'bus managed
to retain withal its fantastic atmosphere.
107



<pb n="108"/>
THIS IS THE END 
Mr. Russell asked presently, "Why are (
you a 'bus-conductor ?"
"To get some money," replied the con-
ductor baldly. " I want to find out what is
the attraction of money. Besides, if one talks 
such a lot as I do, to do anything-however 
small-saves one from being utterly futile. .
When I get to Heaven, the angels won't be 'i
able to say, 'Tush tush, you lived on the 
charity of God.'   That's what unearned
money is, isn't it? And what's the use of
charity ? "
"Do you ever get a day off?" asked
Mr. Russell.
" Occasionally."
"Will you meet me on the steps of St.
Paul's next Sunday at ten ?"
"No, because I shall be at work next
Sunday."
"Will you meet me the Sunday after
that ?"
"Yes," said Jay. The Family's theories
on the bringing up of girls had evidently
been wasted on her.
" What's the use of looking for this girl ?"
she asked, after a round of duty. "Why
Tnft



<pb n="109"/>
THIS IS THE END
not leave her on her happy shore ? Do you
know, sir, I sympathise enormously with that
girl."
"I don't expect you would if you knew
her," said Mr. Russell. "She must be quite
different from you, by what I hear from her
relations. I think she must be an aggressive,
suffragetty sort of girl. Girls nowadays seem
to find running away from home a sufficient
profession."
"You say that because you are so dread-
fully much Older and Wiser," said Jay.
"Why are you looking for her, then? "
"I'm not," said Mr. Russell. "She is
just a trespasser. I'm looking for the place
because I know I know it." 
"I hope you'll never1fid it," said Jay
crossly. She announced Ludgate Circus in a
startling voice, and ended the conversation.
She was tired because she had been up all
night among distressed friends in the Brown
Borough. There had been a fight in Tann
Street. Mrs. O'Rourke had broken the face
of little Mrs. Love. Mrs. Love had never
fought before; her fists were like lamb cutlets,
and she had had a good mother with non-
IOO



<pb n="110"/>
THIS IS THE END
combatant principles.  All these things are
drawbacks in a Brown Borough argument.
But Mrs. Love was a friend of Jay's, and I
don't think she had found that a drawback.
Feverish discussions with dreadfully impartial
policemen, feverish drying of feverish tears,
feverish extracting of medicaments from closed
chemists, and finally a feverish triumph of
words with which Jay capped Mrs. O'Rourke's
triumph of fists were the items in the sum of
a feverish night. So Jay was tired.
Mr. Russell was too early for his business,
and he went into St. Paul's and sat on a seat
far back.
St. Paul was an anti-saint, I think, who
very badly needed to get married and be
answered back now and then. I believe it is
possible that he was unworthy of that great
house called by his name. The gospel of a
very splendid detachment speaks within its
walls, its windows turn inward, its music sings
to itself. Tossed City sinners go in and out,
and pass, and penetrate, but still the music
dreams, and still the dim gold blinks above
their heads. A muffled God walks the aisles,
IIO



<pb n="111"/>
THIS IS THE END
and you, in the bristling wilderness of chairs,
can clutch at His skirts and never see His
eyes.  Nothing comes forward from    that
altar to meet you. It is as if He walked
talking to Himself, and as if even His speech
were lost in those devouring spaces.
Mr. Russell sat near the door, and found
only his thoughts and the shuffle of seeking
feet to keep him company.
"An Older and Wiser Man ..." he
thought.  "God forgive me for letting it
pass."
If he had thought it worth while to profess
an " ism " at all, he would have been a fatalist.
He was the victim of an unwitty cynicism,
and of a heavy irresponsibility. He applied
either "It isn't worth while" or "It doesn't
matter" to everything. He never expressed
his thoughts to himself-it was not worth
while,-but I think he knew within himself
that life was made of paper, and thrown to-
gether in a crackling chaos. There was no
depth in anything, and a mere thought could
slay the highest thing in the world. The
only thing that ever made his heart laugh
was the idea of fineness finding place in him-
III



<pb n="112"/>
THIS IS THE END           '
self. A dream of himself in a heroic ligl
sometimes made him poke himself in the ri
and mock the farce of human vanity. HJ
was like a man in a world that lacked mirro
a man who sees his dark deformed shad
on the sands, and thinks it represents hi
fairly.
He was without self-consciousness, know 
ing that he was not worth his own recognition
At home he often recited little confused
poems of his own composition to his Hound, 
and never noticed the surprise of the servants. '
He never knew that in the company of Mr.
and Mrs. Gustus and Kew he was hardly 
allowed to utter three consecutive words,
although, when he was away from them, and '
especially when he was with the 'bus-con-,
ductor, he felt a delightfil lack of restraint.
As he sat down and looked at the far 
unanswering altar, he had two dim thoughts.;
One was that a man might get Older and 
Wiser, without getting old enough or wise 
enough to choose his road. The other was a'
question as to whether it is ever really worth 
wie to read what the signpost says. 
From the moment when Mr. Russell left
I/  1



<pb n="113"/>
THIS IS THE END
her 'bus, Jay became stupefied by an invasion
of the Secret World.
She gave the tickets and change with
accuracy, she kept count of the stream of
climbers on to the top of the 'bus, she stilled
the angry whirlpool of people on the pave-
ment for whom there was no room, she
dislodged passengers at the corners of their
own streets-even that gentleman (almost
always to be found in an obscure corner of
an east-going 'bus) who had sunk into a
sudden and pathetic sleep just when his
pennyworth of ride was coming to an end,-
she received an unexpected inspector with the
smile that comes of knowing every passenger to
be properly ticketed; she even laughed at his
joke. She weeded out the Whitechapel Jew-
esses at the Bank, and introduced them to the
Mile End 'buses. She handed out to them their
sombre and insolent-looking babies, and when
one mother thanked her profusely in Yiddish,
she replied, "Bitte, bitte. .. ."  Yet all the
while the wind blew to her old remembrances
of the low chimneys and the bending roofs
of the House by the Sea, and the smell of
the high curving fields, and the shouting of
II3             I



<pb n="114"/>
THIS IS THE END 
the sea. And all the while her hands must
grope for the handle of the heavy door, and
her eyes must fill with blindness because of
the wonderful promise of distant cliffs with
the sun on them, and because the sea was so
shining. And all the while her ears must
strain to hear a voice within the house ....
It is a very great honour to be given two
lives to live; --
....- The monotonous journeys trod on each
other's heels.  Slowly the day consumed
itself. It grew dimmer and dimmer for Jay,
though I have no doubt that habit protected
her, and that she behaved herself throughout
with commonplace correctness.
She found presently that the great weight
of copper money was gone from her shoulder,
and that it was evening, and that Chloris was
coming down Mabel Place to meet her.
Chloris was wagging her whole person from
the shoulder-blades backwards; she never
found adequate the tail that had originally
been provided for that purpose. Jay stumbled
up the step of Eighteen Mabel Place, and
found at last the path she wanted.
The path was one that had never been
V T A



<pb n="115"/>
THIS IS THE END
touched by a professional pathmaker. Feet,
not hands, had made it.   The rocks im-
patiently thrust it aside every little way, and
here and there were steps up and down for
no reason except that the rock would have it
so. The path chose its way so that you
might see the sea from every inch of it.
The thundering headlands sprang from Jay's
left hand, and she could see the cliffs written
over with strange lines, and the shadow that
they cast upon deep water.      It was the
l otir of a great passion, and against that
· :_ J    ,V pink foxgloves bowed dramatically
;|^^,^firinge of space. The white gulls
I leo.f the sea. I wish colour
l tiy words. I wish I could
_A isetlf^ in the dark. I can
l  iw fl enough of the colour
l 'my ears of the crying of the
X ini most greedy of these things,
^HRHI      5kho thought for the morrow, so that
IS  l ,tiolrtow  dawns darkly I have nothing
;';"r.   away to comfort me.
i    . The path joins the more civilised road
?."!  almost at the door of the House by the Sea.
:i:   You tumble over a great round rock that
Il"



<pb n="116"/>
THIS IS THE END 
still bears the marks ot the sea's fingers, '
you are at the door. 
The house was full of sunlight. Great
panels of sunlight lay across the air.  The
fingers of the honeysuckle in the rough
painted bowl by the window caught and
held sunlight. In every room of the house
you can always hear the eternal march of the
sea up and down the shore. Nothing ever
drowns that measured confusion. Sometimes
the voices of friends thread in and out of it,
sometimes the dogs bark, or a coming meal
clinks in the stone passage, or you can catch
the squealing of the children in their baths,
sometimes your heart stops beating to listen
to the speech of the ghosts that haunt the
house, but no sound ever usurps the throne
of the sea.
They were all on the stairs, the Secret
Friend and the children. They all wore
untidy clothes, and hard-boiled eggs bulged
from their pockets. The Secret Friend has
red hair, you might call its colour vulgar.
But Jay likes it very much. He hardly ever
sits still, you can never see him think, he has
a way of answering you almost before you
__t



<pb n="117"/>
THIS IS THE END
have finished speaking. His mind always
seems to be exploring among words, and
sometimes you can hear him telling himself
splendid sentences without meaning. For
this reason everything connected with him
has a name, from his dog, which is called
Trelawney, to the last cigarette he smokes at
night, which is called Isobel. This trick Jay
has imported into her own establishment:
she has an umbrella called Macdonald, and
a little occasional pleurisy pain under one
rib, which she introduces to the Family as
Julia.
The children in the house were just those
very children that every woman hopes, or has
hoped, to have for her own.
They were just starting for a walk, and
the Secret Friend was finishing a story.
"How    can you remember things that
happened-I suppose-squillions of years
ago," said the eldest child. "You tell them
as if they happened yesterday. Doesn't it
seem as if all the happiest things happened
yesterday ? "
"To me it seems that they will happen
to-morrow," said the Secret Friend. "But
I17



<pb n="118"/>
THIS IS THE END
then there is so little difference between
yesterday and to-morrow.   How can you
tell which is which?   Only clocks and
calendars are silly enough to tread on the
tail of a little space between sunrise and
sunset and call it to-day. How do you know
which way up time is happening ?"
"Because yesterday the sun set, and we
went to bed," said the youngest child.
"I think to-morrow is a little person in
dark clothes watching and listening," said
the eldest child. "And to-day is Cinderella,
all shiny and beautiful until twelve o'clock
strikes."
" All yesterdays and all to-morrows are
in this house listening," said the Secret
Friend.  "This is the place where time is
without a name. Here the beginning comes
after the end. To-morrow we shall be born.
Yesterday we died. To-day was just a
little passage built of twenty-four odd hours.
And now we will sing the Loud Song."
They were on the rocky path now, and
they sang the Loud Song. Both that path
and that song go on for ever, and the words
of the song are like this:
i18



<pb n="119"/>
THIS IS THE END
There is no house like our house
Even in Heaven.
There is no family like our family
Even in Heaven.
There is no Country like our Country
Even in Heaven.
There is no sea like our sea
Even in Heaven.
Most families sing this song, more or
less, but few could sing it so loudly as this
family did.
The dog Trelawney ran after the shadows
of the seagulls.
119



<pb n="120"/>
-'' 'C



<pb n="121"/>
THERE is the track my feet have worn
By which my fate may find me:
From that dim place where I was born
Those footprints run behind me.
Uncertain was the trail I left,
For-oh, the way was stormy;
But now this splendid sea has cleft
My journey from before me.
Three things the sea shall never end,
Three things shall mock its power:
My singing soul, my Secret Friend,
And this my perfect hour.
And you shall seek me till you reach
The tangled tide advancing,
And you shall find upon the beach
The traces of my dancing,
And in the air the happy speech
Of Secret Friends romancing.
12I



<pb n="122"/>
'-AC



<pb n="123"/>
FOR some minutes some one had been knock-
ing on the door. The sound was like an
intruder in the Secret World, beckoning
insistently to Jay. But she took no notice
of it until a loud voice said: " You need not
think you are paddling in golden seas and
inaccessible to your relations, because you are
here, and I can see you through the window."
After a moment's confusion, Jay found
that this was so, and she got up and let
Kew in.
"I will just ask you how you are," he
said hurriedly. "And how things are going
in the Other World, and all that. But you
needn't answer, because I haven't much time,
and I want very badly to talk about myself.
I never get a chance when Anonyma is there,
and when I return to France (which is likely
to happen soon), I shan't find much chance
to talk there. I am so glad I am going
123



<pb n="124"/>
THIS IS THE END
back, I am so sick of hearing other people
talk about things that are not worth mention-
ing. Poor dear Anonyma, she meant all
this recent gaiety as a reward to me for war
work dutifully done. But if this be jam,
give me my next pill unadorned. A motor
tour combined with Anonyma is tiring. If
I were alone with Russ I might enjoy it."
"Who is Russ ?"
"The owner of Christina, and Christina
is the vehicle which contains us during the
search for you."
He became aware of the velvet face of
Chloris, gazing at him from between his
knees.
"What does Chloris do while you are
week-ending in Heaven. Do you take her
with you ?"
"There is already a dog there, called
Trelawney."
"By Jove, that would make a nice little
clue for Anonyma. There can be only one
dog on the sea-coast called Trelawney. We
could stop and ask every dog we met what
its name was. Besides, the name suggests
Cornwall. What breed is the dog? Look
124



<pb n="125"/>
THIS IS 'HE END
here, will you write the Family a letter giving
it a few neat clues for Anonyma? After all,
we ought to give her all the pleasure we can,
I sometimes think we are a disappointing
family for her to have married. We lie to
her, she lies to us, her enthusiasms make us
smile behind our hands, ours make her yawn
behind her notebook. Send us a good en-
couraging letter, addressed to the house in
Kensington. We always wire our address
there as we move. Give us details about
Trelawney, and, if possible, the name of the
nearest post town. If we must lie, let us
give all the pleasure we can by doing so.
Poor old Anonyma.
"It's getting dark, I must go back to the
Family. I am as a babe in the hands of
Anonyma, and like a babe I promised her
I would be back before dark.     Do you
remember how we used to long to be lost
after nightfall, just for the dramatic effect ?
Yet we were awfully frightened of the dark.
Do you remember how we used to dare each
other to get out of bed and run three times
round the night nursery ? I have never felt
so brave since, as I used to feel as I jumped
rTO



<pb n="126"/>
THIS IS THE END
into bed conscious of an ordeal creditably
over. Why is bed such a safe place? I
am not half so brave as I used to be. I
remember at the age of ten doing a thing
that I have never dared to do since. I sat
in the bath with my back to the taps. Do
you suppose the innocent designer of baths
meant everybody to sit like that, with a tap
looking over each shoulder?    Taps are
known to be savage brutes, and it is every-
body's instinct to sit the other way round,
and keep an eye on the danger. If I were
as brave now as I was at ten, I could probably
win the War. Oh, Jay, I can't stop talking,
I am so pleased to be nearly out of the clutches
of my relations."
"Are you sure you won't be killed?"
asked Jay suddenly.
"I can't be," said Kew. "How could
I be ? I'm me. I'm not brave, and I don't
go to France with one eye on duty and the
other on the possibility of never coming back.
I go because the crowd goes, and the crowd
-a rather shrunken crowd-will come back
safe.  I'm  too  average a man to get
killed."
T*fi



<pb n="127"/>
THIS IS THE END
"Don't you think all those million ghosts
are thinking, 'What business had Death to
choose me?'" suggested Jay.
" No," said Kew. " I'm sure they know."
After a few seconds' pause he said, "By
Jove, are you in fancy dress ?"
"No. Why?"
"Why indeed. Why a kilt and yards of
gaiters? Why a hat like a Colonial horse
marine? "
"Oh, this is the uniform  of a 'bus-
conductor," replied Jay.
Kew scanned it with distaste. Presently
he said, "Don't you think you'd better give
it up? Buy a new hat with a day's earnings,
and get the sack."
"I can't quarrel with my bread and
butter," said Jay.
"Surely this is only jam," said Kew.
"You've got plenty of money of your own
for bread and butter."
" I haven't now," answered Jay. "I gave
up having money when the War started.
Perhaps I chucked it into the Serpentine.
Perhaps not. I forget."
Kew got up slowly.   "Well," he said,
127



<pb n="128"/>
THIS IS THE END
"sure you're all right? I must be .
I don't know when the last train goes."
In London it is impossible to ignore 
fact that you are late.  The self-righteo
hands of clocks point out your guilt whic
ever way you look. Your eye and your 
are accused on every side. You long for th
courteous clocklessness of the country; ther
mercifully, the sun neither ticks nor strikes
nor cavils at the minutes.
There was a crowd of home-goers at Brown
Borough Church, and each 'bus as it arrived
was like the angel troubling the waters of
Bethesda. There was no hope for the old
or timid. Kew was an expert in the small
sciences of London. He knew not only how
to mount a 'bus, while others of his like were
trying four abreast to do the same, but also
how to stand on a space exactly half the size
of his boot soles, without holding on. (This
is done, as you probably know too, by not
looking out of the window.)
Kew had given up taxis and cigars in
war-time. It was his pretence never to do
anything on principle, so he would have
blushed if anybody had commented on this
128 .



<pb n="129"/>
THIS IS THE END
ingenuous economy. The fact that he had
joined the Army the first day of the War was
also, I think, a tender spot in the conscience
of Kew. A Victoria Cross would have been
practically unbearable, and even to be men-
tioned in despatches would have been a most
upsetting contradiction of that commonplace
and unprincipled past of which he boasted.
He thought he was such a simple soul that
he had no motives or principles in anything
that he did, but really he was simpler than
that. He was so simple that he did his best
without thinking about it. It certainly sounds
rather a curious way to live in the twentieth
century.
"'Ere, you're seven standin' inside," said
the gentleman 'bus - conductor, when, after
long sojourn in upper regions, he came down
to his basement floor. "Five standin' is all
I'm supposed to 'ave, an' five standin' is all
I'll allow. Why should I get myself into
trouble for 'avin' more'n five standin', if five
standin' is all I'm allowed to 'ave ?"
In spite of a chorus of nervous assent
from all his flock, and the blushing disappear-
ance of the two superfluous standers, the
129             K



<pb n="130"/>
THIS IS THE END         i
'bus-conductor continued his lament iuik _ :.^
strain. To the man with a small but ]isi||
grievance, sympathy is a fatal offering. 
The 'bus-conductor had a round red nose ;l
and very defective teeth. Kew studied him in
a new light, for this was Jay's fellow-worker. ;
Somehow it seemed very regrettable. 
"I wish I hadn't promised not to tell the i
Family," he thought.
He and Jay never broke their promises to
each other, and there was a tacit agreement
that when they found it necessary to lie to
each other, they always gave each other
warning. Where the rest of the world was
concerned, I am afraid they used their dis-
cretion in this matter.
"It ought to be stopped.   The tactful
foot of Family authority ought to step on it."
He presented his penny angrily to the
'bus-conductor.
"I expect this sort of man asks Jay to
walk out with him," he thought, and with a
cold glance took the ticket offered to him.
" Lucky I'm so utterly selfish," he thought,
"or I should be devilish worried."
His train was one which boasted a
130



<pb n="131"/>
THIS IS THE END
restaurant car, and Kew   patronised this
' institution. But when he was in the middle
of cold meat, he thought: "She is probably
trying to live on twopence-halfpenny a week.
Continual tripe and onions."
So he refused pudding. The pudding,
persistent as only a railway pudding can be,
came back incredulously three times.  But
Kew pushed it away.
"If I could get anybody outside the
Family to use their influence, I should be
within the letter of the law. But I mostly
know subalterns, and nobody below a Brigadier
would be likely to have much influence with
Jay.  She'd probably talk down even a
sergeant-major."
It seems curious that he should deplore
the fact that Jay had turned into a 'bus-
conductor more deeply than he had deplored
her experiments in sweated employment. I
think that a uniformed sister or wife is almost
unbearable to most men, except, perhaps,
one in the nurse's uniform, of which even
St. Paul might have approved. The gaiters
of the 'bus-conductor had shaken Kew to his
foundations. The thought of the skirt still
Ye.T



<pb n="132"/>
THIS IS THE END
brought his heart into his mouth. He was
so lacking in the modern mind that he still
considered himself a gentleman. No Socialist,
speaking between clenched teeth in a strangled
voice of largely groundless protest, had ever
gained the ear of Kew.    He had never
joined a society of any sort. He had never
attended a public meeting since he gave up
being a Salvationist at the age of ten.
"It must be stopped," he said, as he
got out of the train. "I'll think of a way
in my bath to-morrow." This was always
the moment he looked forward to for
inspirations.
"'Anonyma was observable as he walked
from  the station to the inn, craning ex-
· ~'  travagantly from  the sitting-room window.
She came downstairs, and met him at the
door.
"Such a disaster," she said, and handed
him a telegram.
Kew stood aghast, as she meant him to.
No disaster is ever so great as it is before you
know what it is. But Kew ought to have
known Anonyma's disasters by experience.
"Russ's wife has appeared."
132



<pb n="133"/>
THIS IS THE END
"Why should she be introduced as a
disaster ?" asked Kew, with a sigh of relief.
"Is she a maniac, or a suffragette, or a
Mormon, or just some one who has never
read any of your books ? "
He opened the telegram. It called upon
him to rejoin his battalion next day at noon.
" Russ went to his house to fetch some-
thing this morning and found his wife there.
He looks quite ill. She insisted on coming
here with him, and now she wishes to go on
the tour with us. As I hear the car is hers,
we can hardly refuse."
"I don't pretend to understand the subtle-
ties of this disaster," said Kew. "But as you
evidently don't intend me to, I will not try.
Notice, however, that I am keeping my head.
I have always wondered how I should behave
in a disaster."
"Wait till you meet her," said Anonyma.
;,-f  ew heard Mrs. Russell's melodramatic
laughter as he approached the sitting-room
door, and he trembled. She laughed "Ha-
ha-ha" in a concise way, and the sound was
constant.
"That is her ready sense of fun that you



<pb n="134"/>
THIS IS THE END
can hear," said Anonyma bitterly.   . Shf
is teaching Gustus to see the humoro.
side."
They entered to find poor Cousin Gustuutt
bending like a reed before a perfect gale of'
"Ha-ha-ha's."  Mrs. Russell was so much
interested in what she was saying that she left 
Kew on her leeward side for the moment',
hardly looking at him as she shook hands.
" It's enough to make the gods laugh on
Olympus," she said, but it did not make
Cousin Gustus laugh. Noticing this, Mrs.
Russell turned to Kew.
"I was telling your cousin about my paci-
ficist efforts in the States," she said. " Yes,
I can see your eye twinkling; I koiw a paci-
fist is a funny thing to be. But I'm not one
of the-what I call dumpy-toad-in-the-hole
ones. I do it all joyously. I was telling
your cousin how very small was the chance
that robbed us of success in Ohio."
"What sort of success ?" asked Kew.
"Peace," said Mrs. Russell.
"But is Ohio at war ? "
Mrs. Russell laughed heartily. Her un-
necessarily frank laughter showed her gums



<pb n="135"/>
THIS IS THE END
as well as her teeth, and made one wish that
her sense of humour were not quite so
keen.
"I see you are one of us," she said.
"What I call one of the Jolly Fraternity.
No, Ohio is still enjoying peace. But-if you
follow me-from the States peace will come;
there we must fix our hopes. If we can get
those millions of brothers and sisters of ours
'across the duck-pond '-as I call it-to see
its urgency, peace must come. For brothers
and sisters they are, you know; patriotism
will come in time to be considered a vice.
How can one's soul-if you take my meaning
-be affected by the latitude and longitude in
which one's body was born ? From the States
the truth'shall come, salvation shall dawn in
the west. Listen to me trying to be poetic,
it makes me laugh."
One noticed that it did.
"War is so reasonless as to be funny,"
she said.
"But you haven't told me yet about the
little chance that you thought would tickle
Olympus," said Kew.
"You're laughing at me," said Mrs.
I35



<pb n="136"/>
THIS IS THE END
Russell. "But I don't mind, for I laugh at
myself. I like you. Shake."
Kew   immediately thought her a in,
woman, though peculiar.
Mr. Russell looked in and saw the Shake
in progress. He murmured something and
withdrew hurriedly. For a moment they
could hear his agitated voice in the passage
reciting Milton to his Hound.
"Do listen to my husband, never silent,"
said Mrs. Russell. " Did you ever see a man
like him ?"
There is no real answer to this sort of
question, so Kew said "Yo," which is always
safe. Then he added, " Do tell me about the
little chance."
"This was the little chance," smiled Mrs.
Russell. "We ought to have had a tre-
mendously successful peace-meeting in a cer-
tain town in Ohio. We had every reason to
expect three thousand people, and we thought
of proposing the re-naming of the town-
calling it Peace. But the little chance was a
printer's error-the advertisement gave the
date wrong. A crowd turned up at the
empty hall, and two days later, when we
T" 1



<pb n="137"/>
THIS IS THE END
arrived, they were so tired of us that they
booed our demonstration. Just the stupidity
of an inky printer between us and success."
"Do you mean to say that but for that
we should have had peace by now?" asked
Kew in a reverent voice.
"You never know," said Mrs. Russell.
"That meeting might have been the match
to light the flame of peace all over the world.
It's bitterly and satirically funny, isn't it,
what Fate will do. Ha-ha-ha."
Cousin Gustus laughed hysterically in
chorus, and then said that his head ached, and
that he thought he would go to bed early.
Anonyma led him away.
"Please don't make peace for a week or
two yet," begged Kew. "Let me see what I
can do first. I am going to-morrow."
" How foolish of you," said Mrs. Russell.
"If you like, I believe I have enough influence
to get you to America instead."
"I think I like France best," said Kew.
"I don't feel as if I could be content any-
where short of France just now."
"Surely you won't be content anywhere,
murdering yourfellow-men," said Mrs. Russell.
·                        I·T



<pb n="138"/>
THIS IS THE END
"You won't mind my incurable flippancy,
will you?   I can't help treating things
lightly."
"Not at all," replied Kew. "But I am
often content in the intervals of murdering
my fellow-men. I play the penny whistle in
my dug-out."
"Now tell me," said Mrs. Russell, "what
are you all doing here? What mischief are
you leading my Herbert into ? "
When Kew had recovered from a foolish
astonishment at hearing that Mr. Russell was
known to others as Herbert, he said, " We're
looking-not very seriously-for my sister,
who seems to have eloped by herself to the
west coast, without leaving us her address."
"I know. Herbert told me that much.
A place on the sea-front, isn't it ? But you
know, I feel a certain responsibility for Her-
bert, I have neglected him so long. I cannot
bear that he should waste his time in what I
call these stirring days. You mustn't think
because I treat life as one huge joke that I
can never be serious. One can wear a gay
mask, but-you understand me, don't you?
You are one of us."
138



<pb n="139"/>
THIS IS THE END
There was a pause, and then she said,
"Ha-ha. Doesn't it seem funny. We've
only known each other an hour, and here we
are intimate .. ."
Kew obediently allowed himself for a
moment to see the humorous side, and then
said, " What are your plans then, yours and
Mr. Russell's?"
"I have neglected him too long, poor old
thing," said Mrs. Russell. " I must stay with
him now, and cheer him up. A cheery heart
can bridge any gulf, don't you think? You
know, I was just what I call a jolly girl when
I married him, and afterwards I' forgot to
grow up, I think. Perhaps my treatment of
him has been rather irresponsible. I must
try and make up-what I call' kiss and be
friends,' like two jolly little kiddies."
"Then why not join the motor tour ?"
"I would rather take Herbert back to our
little nest in London. There's no place like
home, as I always say. From there we might
work together for the great cause of Peace-
what I call ' My Grail.'"
She had crimped hair and a long nose, the
tip of which moved when she spoke. You
139



<pb n="140"/>
THIS IS THE END
would never have given her credit for such
influence as she claimed in the world's affairs.
Only her Homeric laughter, and a pair of
lorgnettes, reminded you of her greatness.
When Kew finally disentangled himself
from the company of this jolly creature, it
was very late. But the voice of Anonyma
arrested him on his way to bed. Her face,
with a corn-coloured plait on each side of it,
looked at him cautiously from a dark doorway.
"Kew," said Anonyma, " I won't stand it.
We must be rescued."
"Nobody can remove her now without
also removing Russ and Christina," said Kew.
"The reconciliation has gone too far."
"Then Russ must be sacrificed, and even
the car," said Anonyma firmly.  "Gustus
and I can hire if we must. That woman
must be removed. The jealous cat!"
Kew began to see light. " I'll rescue you,
then," he replied. "I'll think of a way in
my bath."
Next morning a great noise, centring in
the bathroom, overflowed through the inn.
It was the noise of Kew singing joyful extracts



<pb n="141"/>
THIS IS THE END
from  Peer Gynt.  Do you remember the
beginning of the end of the Hall of the
Mountain King? It goes:
"Bomp - chink. . . . Bomp - chink ..
Tootle - tootle - tootle - tootle - tootle - tootle-
tee .... Bomp-chink, ..." etc., etc.
The way in which Kew rendered this
passage, notoriously a difficult one for a solo
voice, would have conveyed to any one
who knew him that he had solved both his
problems.
Anonyma knocked on the bathroom door,
and said, " Cousin Gustus's headache is still
bad."
Kew therefore broke into Anitra's Dance,
which is more subdued.
Before breakfast he and Mr. Russell and
the Hound walked to the downs. The motor
tour seemed to have come to a standstill.
Cousin Gustus's headache could be felt all
over the house.
The moment Mr. Russell and Kew were
out of earshot of the inn, Kew made such a
violent resolve to speak that he nearly broke
a tooth.
"Russ," he said, "I want to get off my
J4I



<pb n="142"/>
THIS IS THE END
chest for your benefit something that has been
worrying me awfully."
Mr. Russell made no answer. He had
got out of the habit of answering.
"It's about Jay," continued Kew.   "I
must break to you first that Jay's ' house on
the sea-front,' with all its accessories-gulls,
ghosts, turrets, aeroplanes, and Friends-is
one large and elaborate lie. She and I are
very much alike. The only difference between
us used to be her skirt, and now she has gone
a good way towards discarding that. She is
nowhere near the sea. She is in London.
Now you, Russ, are what she and I used to
call an ' Older and Wiser-' "
Mr. Russell jumped violently, but uttered
nothing except a little curse to his dog, which
was almost under his feet.
"-And you are about the only person I
could trust, in my absence, to get Jay out of
an uncommonly silly position. I can't bear
her present pose. It must stop'at once, and
if I had time I would stop it myself. I have
unfortunately sworn not to give her away to
the Family, so I come to you. She is a 'bus-
conductor."
IA2



<pb n="143"/>
THIS IS THE END
Mr. Russell refrained from jumping. I
believe he had expected it. But he said, " It
would be too funny."
Kew looked at him nervously, fearing-for
a moment lest Mrs. Russell's sense of humour
had proved infectious.
Mr. Russell was thinking how funny it
would be if the finger of desirable coincidence
had touched his life. How funny if a nice
piece of six-shilling fiction should have taken
upon itself to make of him its hero. Too
funny to be true.
But you, I hope, will remember that the
coincidence was not so funny as he thought,
since Jay had beckoned to it with her eyes
open.
"Now, I have a prejudice against 'bus-
conductors," said Kew.
"Why?" asked Mr. Russell rather in-
dignantly.
" I can't explain it. If I could, it wouldn't
be a prejudice, it would be an opinion. But
-well-just think. . . . The trousered 'bus-
conductors probably ask her to walk out with
them in Victoria Park on Sundays."
"I see your point," said Mr. Russell.
143



<pb n="144"/>
THIS IS THE END
"You are about double as old as she is-
if I may say so-and you are not one of the
Family, two great advantages. You know,
Jay has suffered from not meeting enough
Older and Wiser people.   She has had to
worry out things too much by herself; she
has never been talked to by grown-ups whom
she could respect.  Anonyma never talked
with us, though she occasionally ' Had a Good
Talk.'  She never played, but sometimes
suggested 'Having a Good Game.'      It's
different, somehow. You, Older and Wiser
without being too old or too wise, might
impress Jay a lot, I think, because you don't
say overmuch. And I want you to tell her
something of what I feel about it too."
"I never realised before that from your
point of view there was any advantage in
being Older and Wiser," said Mr. Russell.
"You don't mind my saying all this?"
said Kew. It was an assumption rather than
a question.
"Not at all. But I don't understand
exactly what you want me to do."
"To give up this idiotic motor tour,"
said Kew. "And go back to London, and
I44



<pb n="145"/>
THIS IS THE END
talk Jay out of her 'bus-ism. I want her to
leave it off, and let the Family discover her
romantically enjoying some passable imitation
of her Secret World. I want the Family
never to know of all that lay between. I do
want it all to come right. I'm going off
to-day, and I may not see her again. And I
know hardly any trustable person but you."
" Right," said Mr. Russell.
He thought: It's too funny to be true,
but if it isn't true, I shall be surprised.
Kew enlarged to him on the details of his
mission.
On the breakfast table, when they returned,
they found a letter from Jay, evidently
written for private circulation in the Family.
DEAR KEW-I have just come in from a walk
almost as exciting as it was beautiful. We walked
through our village, which clings to both sides of
a crack-like harbour that might just contain a care-
fully navigated walnut-shell. The village is grey
and white, all its walls are whitewashed, all its
roofs are slate with cushions of stone-crop clinging
to them. Sea-thistles grow outside its doors, sea-
gulls are its only birds. The slope on which it
stands is so steep that the main road is on a level
with the roofs on one side, and if you were absent-
IrL               L



<pb n="146"/>
THIS IS THE END
minded, you might walk on to a roof and fall down
a chimney before you became aware that you had
strayed from the street. But we were not absent-
minded. We sang Loud Songs all the way. We
ran across the grass after the shadows of the round
clouds that bowled across the sky. In single file
we followed the dog Trelawney after the seagulls.
Everything was so clear that we could see the little
rare island that keeps itself to itself on our horizon.
I don't know its name; they say it bears a town
and a post-office and a parson, but I don't think
this is true. I think that island is an intermittent
dream of ours. When you get beyond the village,
the cliff leaves off indulging in coves and harbours
and such frivolities, and decides to look upon itself
seriously as a giant wall against a giant sea. Only
it occasionally defeats its own object, because it
stands up so straight that the sea finds it easier to
knock down. On a point of cliff there was a
Lorelei seagull standing, with its eye on Trelawney.
It had pale eyes, and a red drop on its beak. And 
Trelawney, being a man-dog, did what the seagull ;
meant him to do. He ran for it, he ran too far,
and fell over the edge. Well, this is not a tragic ,;
incident, only an exciting one. Trelawney fell on 
to a ledge about ten foot below the top of the cliff, 
and sat there in perfect safety, shrieking for help. 
My Friend said: "This is a case of 'Bite my
teeth and Go."' It is a saying in this family, dating
from the Spartan childhood of my Friend, that



<pb n="147"/>
TS IS THE END
everything is possible to one who bites his teeth
and goes. The less you like it, the harder you
bite your teeth, and it certainly helps. My
Friend said: " If we never meet again, remember
to catch and hang that seagull for wilful murder.
It would look rather nice stuffed in the hall."
The cliff overhangs rather just there, and when he
got over the edge, not being a fly or used to walking
upside down, he missed his footing. We heard a
yelp from Trelawney. But the seagull's conscience
is still free of murder, my Friend only fell on to
Trelawney's ledge. So it was all right, and we
ate our hard-boiled eggs on the scene of the incident.
"I remember          " said Mr. Russell.
"That letter," said Anonyma, "ought
to help us a bit."
She was quite bright, because Kew had
conveyed to her the hope that the plot for
the rescue of the Family was doing well.
Cousin Gustus also, with no traces of a head-
ache except a faint smell of Eau-de-Cologne,
had come down hopefully to breakfast.
" Obviously the North coast of Cornwall,"
said Mrs. Russell. "The village might be
Boscastle, and the island is surely Lundy. ...
Such an intensely funny name, Lundy, isn't
it ? Ha-ha I For some reason it amuses me



<pb n="148"/>
THIS IS THE END
more and more every time I hear it. It
reminds me of learning geography with the
taste of ink and bitten pen in my mouth. I
used to catch my sister's eye-just as I'm
catching yours now-and laugh ever so much,
over Lundy. I used to be a terror to my
governesses."
" I'm very much afraid that I can't spare
much more time for the motor tour," said
Mr. Russell, and Anonyma was so anxious
for the first signs of rescue that she actually
let him  speak. "Business in London. I
dare say I could get you to Cornwall within
the next few days, but some time this week
I must get back to town."
"I'll come with you," said his wife.
"You can't shake me off so easily, my dear.
Ha-ha!"
"It's too rainy to start to-day," said
Cousin Gustus.   "1  have known people
drowned by swollen rivers and such while
trying to travel in just such a deluge as this.
We will start to-morrow."
" Wet or fine," added Anonyma.
"The fact remains," said Kew, "that I
must leave you by the ten something. I
I,8



<pb n="149"/>
THIS IS THE END
must leave you to sniff without my help, like
bloodhounds, along the trail of the elusive
Jay. But I won't bid any one a fervent
good-bye, because I daresay I shall be back
again on leave for lack of anything else to do
in three weeks' time, if we can't get across
the Channel. In that case I'll meet you one
day next month-say at Land's End or the
Firth of Forth. Otherwise-say forty years
hence in Heaven."
"It is very wrong to joke about Death,"
said Cousin Gustus. "I once knew a man
who died with just such a joke on his
lips."
"I hope it was a better joke than that,"
said Kew. "It can't be wrong to laugh at
Death. Death is such a silly, cynical thing
that a little wholesome leg-pulling by an
impartial observer ought to do it good."
Mr. Russell was heard asking his Hound
in a low voice for the truth about Death and
Immortality.
So Kew went away, and left the Family
gazing at the rain. Mrs. Russell was con-
ducting a mysterious process known as writing
up notes. It was hardly possible, by the way,
149



<pb n="150"/>
THIS IS THE END                *1
that Anonyma could have loved the possessor 
of a rival notebook.
It rained very earnestly. There was no )
hole in the sky for hope to look through.
The puddles in the village street jumped into
the air with the force of the rain. You will, :
without difficulty, remember that it rained '
several times in the Spring of I916. But 
this day was a most perfect example of its
kind.
Cousin Gustus was both depressed and 
depressing. I am  afraid I have not given 
you a very flattering portrait of Cousin
Gustus. I ought to have told you that he
was very well provided with human affections,
and that he loved Kew better than any one
else in the world.  I might say that the
departure of Kew let loose Cousin Gustus's
intense grievance against the Germans, except 
that I could hardly describe a grievance as let
loose that had never been pent up.
Cousin Gustus was always angry with the
Germans whatever they did, but the thing
that made him more angry than ever was
to read in his paper some report admitting
courageous or gracious behaviour in a German. 



<pb n="151"/>
THIS IS THE END
"The partings and the troubles that these
Germans have caused ought to hang like mill-
stones round their necks for ever," said Cousin
Gustus. "Talk about Iron Crosses-Pish I
I should like to have a German here for ten
minutes. I should say to him: 'My Kew
was a good boy, I would almost say a clever
boy, doing well in his profession: no more
thought than that dog has of being a soldier
till War broke out. Does that look as if
we were prepared for War ?' I should say.
'Doesn't that show where the blame lies?'
What could he answer ?"
Mr. Russell and his Hound were appar-
ently listening, but they could offer no
suggestions.
"Kew's going has upset me so that my
headache has returned, and I cannot get any
Aspirin here," continued Cousin Gustus. " I
know a man who was very much addicted to
these neuralgic headaches, who committed
suicide by throwing himself from the bath-
room window, solely owing to neuralgia.
And the rain does nothing towards improving
matters. They say the German guns bring
on the rain. I tell you there is no limit to
T e



<pb n="152"/>
THIS IS THE END              '
their guilt. Look at this morning's paper: .
'The enemy bombarded this section of our
front with increasing intensity during the 
day. .. .' I ask you, IS THAT WAR ?" 
"Yes," said Mr. Russell absently. 
"Nonsense," said Cousin Gustus. "What....
we ought to do is to shoot every German .
we can catch. Shooting's too good for them. 
Hang them. That would teach them. Any ¥
Government but ours would have thought of 
it long ago. Iron Crosses, indeed, Pish! "
Cousin Gustus finds the Iron Cross very :
useful for the filling up of crannies in his ,
edifice of wrath.
Anonyma said: "When I think of those
old fairy-like German songs, 1 feel as if I had
lost a bit of my heart and shall never find it
again. That is what I regret most about this
War. It is bad art."
"Art,indeed,"said CousinGustus. "Why,
every time they steal a picture they get an
Iron Cross. I know a man who saw a German
wearing a perfect rosary of Iron Crosses; the
fellow was boasting of having bayoneted
more babies than any other man in the regi-
ment. Listen to this: 'The enemy attacked



<pb n="153"/>
THIS IS THE END
the outskirts of the village of What D'you
Call'em, and engaged our troops in hand-to-
hand fighting.' Think of it, and we used to
say they were a civilised race. At the point
of the bayonet, it says-isn't it atrocious?
' The enemy were finally repulsed at the point
of the bay- ' oh well, of course that may
be different. I don't pretend to be a military
expert. .."
"I hate the Germans," said Anonyma, " be-
cause they have spoilt my own idea of them.
I hate having a mistake brought home to me."
"I hate the Germans," began Mr. Russell,
< because   -"
"I'm going for a walk," said Anonyma.
"I am sick of sitting here and hearing you
two old fogies argue about the War. If War
is bad art, it is vulgar to refer to it."
I know exactly what Mr. Russell was
going to say. He had a vague culinary
rmetaphor in his mind. I hate the Germans
tecause they are underdone, they are red meat.
Their vices and their virtues and their music,
and their greed and their fairyism and their
militarism, all seem to have been roasted in
a hurry, and to contain, like red meat, the
- is



<pb n="154"/>
THIS IS THE END
natural juices to an extent that seems to us 
excessive. The reason why some of us dis- 
like red meat is that it reminds us too much '
of what our food originally was. As we i
ourselves, possibly, are rather overcooked by
the fire of civilisation, this vulgar deficiency 
in our enemy is very apparent to us. This is
an elaborate, but not a pleasing analogy, and
it was fortunate that Mr. Russell was inter-
rupted. Otherwise, I think he might have
been trying to this day to explain it to an
exasperated Cousin Gustus. He spoke of it
to his Hound, and the idea interested that
animal very much.
Mr. Russell, unfortunately, had a cold, and
was therefore unable on such a wet day to
leave the house or Cousin Gustus. But
Anonyma went out in a mackintosh that gave
her the "silhouette" of a Cossack, and a
beautiful little tarpaulin sou'wester, and high
boots, and a skirt short enough to give the
boots every chance of advertisement. The
notebook was safe in a water-tight pocket.
She covered with great speed and en-
thusiasm the few miles to the sea. She
reached it at a point where the cliff dwindled
I54



<pb n="155"/>
THIS IS THE END
into flatness, where the gentle tide rattled on
pebbles instead of on sand, where the tall
breakwaters contradicted the line of the shore.
The furthest breakwater had seaweed like
hair waving on the water. At intervals it
would seem to be thrust up between two
glassy waves, like a victim  beckoning for
deliverance from the grip of some monster.
And then the sea's lips would close on it
again. The sea was freckled by the rain, the
waves were beaten into submission.  The
tide was rather low, and not very far away
a great company of porpoises bowed each
other through the mazes of a slow quadrille.
There were a few rocks spotted like leopards,
and on one of these a young brown seagull
rested, and allowed itself occasionally to be
washed gracefully away.
"Lazy Nature !" said Anonyma reprov-
ingly. "To sketch such a scheme in a few
careless lines."
For the whole world was rain-colour.
There was no horizon to the sea, the downs
were blotted out, the wet shingle reflected its
surroundings, the waves broke unmarked by
foam or shadow. There was nothing but the
I55



<pb n="156"/>
THIS IS THE END
porpoises and the breakwaters and the rocksi
and a little bald sand dune, sketched on th
canvas of that pale day.
Anonyma perpetuated in her notebookl
her opinion of Nature as an artist. On th'
whole, it was a flattering opinion. Then she;
sat on the breakwater, and thought howi
fortunate she was to be able to think such?
interesting thoughts about what she saw.':
How fortunate to enjoy thought and to cause
thought! How fortunate to feel oneself a
member of the comforting fellowship of
intelligence! "It is much more delightful,"
Anonyma informed the sea, "to be intelligent
than to be beautiful. Why do we all try to
make our outsides beautiful ? There is com-
petition in beauty, but there is brotherhood
in intelligence.  To be clever is to share a
secret and a smile with all clever people." A
vision of the coast of the United Kingdom
encircled by a ring of consciously clever
Anonymas sitting on breakwaters, sharing
each with all a secret and a smile, came
vaguely to her.
She put all that she could of her soliloquy
into her notebook.
I<6



<pb n="157"/>
T3IIS IS THE END
And then she noticed the face of a man,
with ^^t     upon her, appearing stealthily
9   ,'e":'wa'ter. The face wore the grin
.." "i~people wear when they are doing
-,       l O i'th great caution. This gave it a
%oi3'empty, bright expression, like the mask
l  ;t represents comedy in a theatre decoration.
t!?he fice dropped down behind the break-
water, after meeting Anonyma's surprised
eye for a second or two.
Anonyma kept her head.
First she thought it was the face of a
bather, the path to whose clothes she was
unwittingly barring.
Then she thought it was the face of a
picnicker, resentful of her intrusion.
Then she thought it was the face of a
German spy.
The first two of these three thoughts she
rejected because the weather reduced their
possibility to a minimum. The third she
instinctively adopted as a certainty.  The
face at once became obviously German in her
eyes.  It was broader about the chin than
about the forehead, it was pink, the archi-
tecture of the nose was painfully un-English.
I17



<pb n="158"/>
THIS IS THE END
She scanned the sea for the periscope of a'
submarine. 
Anonyma remembered that she had written f
in her notebook, a day or two before, an
intimate description of the coast as seen from '
the Ring.  She also remembered distinctly
seeing in the bar of the inn a notice warning
her to the effect that walls-and probably
breakwaters-have ears and eyes in these
days, and that the German Government has
a persistent wish to possess itself of private
diaries and notebooks.
'I am having an adventure," said Mrs.
Gustus. "I must keep cool."
She got up from her breakwater, holding
her notebook very tightly, and began to walk
away. When she looked back, she saw the
top of the man's head moving behind the
breakwater, in a parallel direction to her own
course. When he reached the point where
the breakwater ended and denied him cover, he
wavered for a moment, and then, with an ex-
pression of elaborate indifference, followed her.
"I must keep even cooler than this,"
thought Anonyma. "I must try and catch
the spy."



<pb n="159"/>
THIS IS THE END
She walked across some waste land sown
with memories of picnics, and reached the
main road. The man crossed the waste land
behind her. He tried in a futile way to look
as if he were not doing so.
On the main road, Anonyma turned and
waited for him.  It seemed useless in that
empty landscape to sustain the pretence that
they were unaware of each other.
"Did you wish to speak to me?" she
asked, as well as she could for the great lump
of excitement that beat in her throat. Before
i; 'J' eyes visions of headlines danced: "LADY
ST'S PLUCKY CAPTURE OF
'l~i"1!nn became dark red as she spoke.
,   he said4  " I wanted to ask you what
'yii were writing in that notebook ?"
Anonyma paused for a moment, as she
decided what she ought to do.   Then she
said in a hoarse voice: "I have detailed
military information about this coast for
twenty miles round in my notebook, with
accurate reports as to the depth of the water.
If you come to my lodgings in D-- , I can
show you a map that I have made."
I Co



<pb n="160"/>
THIS IS THE END
A tremor ran through the stranger.
" A map ?" he repeated.
"Yes, a map," said Anonyma; and then,
as he did not move, she added on the spur of
the moment, "Also a design for a new kind
of bomb which I bought from a man in
London."
"A bomb ?" he said.
Anonyma thought that he was evidently
a foreigner, though his accent was English.
He seemed to find English rather difficult to
understand.
"Why do you tell me all this? " he asked
finally.
" Because I recognise your face as that of
a sp- I mean a fellow-worker in the great
brotherhood of espionage," said Anonyma.
"Come on, then," said the man.
So they walked off together.
"Why did you take up this-calling ?"
asked the man presently.   "Are you a
German ? "
"Well, more or less," said Anonyma.
"At least, I have never been a Christian. I
believe that one must take either War or
Christianity seriously. Hardly both."
I6o



<pb n="161"/>
A\' .  l'  : ·: \ t\ l  ' '7  , ':  ; 
T, IS IS THE END
i It wmi:igo  opportunity for a monologue.
::i    t       stranger was not one who would
#:*^:oolpo^ I y of the conversation.
'    a . E J   'all, men are only minor gods,"
Anonyma, and War is what gods were
:   E3 mwfor. Germany knows that. That's why,
under the present circumstances, I'd rather
take German money than English."
"Are we anywhere near D     yet ?"
Anonyma hoped that he still had no
suspicions. His voice was distinctly nervous.
To reassure him, she said, "Why did you
take up espionage yourself? '
"Why, indeed ?" said the stranger in an
ardent voice. "Of course the pay was enor-
mous. Twenty thousand francs if I could
get an exact chart of the South Coast."
"Why francs ?" asked Anonyma.
"Not francs. I find these various cur-
rencies so confusing, don't you ? Of course
I mean pfennigs."
"Twenty   thousand   pfennigs ?"  said
Anonyma. "Look here, are you trying to
be funny ?"
"Far from it," said the man. "To tell
you the truth, I am awfully nervous."



<pb n="162"/>
THIS IS THE END 
"Of me?" 
"Yes. No. I mean of discovery." 
"You don't seem to be absolutely cut oi.
for your job," said Anonyma. 
They walked in silence for a whii..
Anonyma sought through her mind to find'.
something she could say in keeping with her!
part. She decided finally on a rather am-;
biguous though imposing attitude.
"The Germans have discovered the truth
that anything good is belligerent, love in- 
cluded. You can't fight properly with any
weapon but your life. Death is not the only 
thing that passes by the peace-man. He
remains alive, but he also remains ignorant.
All peace-men are really women in disguise, 
and all women are utterly superfluous to-day. 
We only know men. People who disapprove
of War shall have no part in peace. The
peace shall be ours who suffered for it, and
only we have earned it. The only decent 
thing left for the Americans and Quakers to
do now is to hold their tongues when peace
comes. They haven't earned the right to 
rejoice."
"I am a Quaker," said the stranger.
Tfis



<pb n="163"/>
THIS IS THE END
'"I didn't know the Germans allowed
p sii       sat itrge."
^^^ ,' ' :  anm not a German," said the stranger.
t      'i b MThen what has happened ?" asked
Amonyma, standing suddenly still at the top
:  of the main street of D    . "Why did
you want my notebook "
"Because I could plainly see you taking
notes in it."
"You thought me a spy ?"
"Youdon't leave me much roomfordoubt."
They guided each other to the gate of the
police-station. There they stopped again.
"This is where I was bringing you," said
Anonyma, as their eyes fell simultaneously on
the label over the door:' "Sussex County
Police."
" It seems to me that honours are easy,"
she added after a pause. "Don't you see
what has happened ?"
The stranger thought for a moment with
a look of dawning relief on his pink face.
"But you couldn't have made up all those
dreadful opinions," he said.
"I didn't," said Anonyma. "I meant
them all-as applied to England."



<pb n="164"/>
THIS IS THE END
"Don't you think we'd better take each
other in to make sure? " suggested her com-
panion. "The Inspector's quite a good sort.
I know him well. . .."
"You may read my notebook if you like
to make quite sure," said Anonyma. "I'm
almost sure the Inspector would have either
too much or too little sense of humour for
the situation."
She was conscious of a certain disappoint-
ment. Her adventure had fallen flat, she
felt no pleasure in the idea of painting a
vivid word-vignette for the people at home.
Even her notebook must never hear of this
morning's work.
" How foolish of you," she said irritably.
"Do 1 look like a spy ?"
"Do I?"
She felt impelled to be angry with him,
and seized upon another pretext.
"You are a conscientious objector, I sup-
pose. And what business has a conscientious
objector to be spy-hunting ? Do I understand
that you will only help your country when you
can do it vicariously, through the police, with
no risk to yourself? It isn't very dignified."
TiA



<pb n="165"/>
THIS IS THE END
-L    "A spy is outside every pale," said the
stranger.  "My conscience objects to the
shedding of blood. Yet it is an English
ii- . conscience all the same."
?       I "English?" said Anonyma.   "If you
|:·  won't die for England, England isn't yours
to love. You shall not have that honour."
"If dying for England is the test of a
patriot," said the pink Quaker, "what about
you ?"
"I would die for England. I work for
England," said Anonyma.
(Four hours a week.)
She went on: "I have told you already
that women-in either sex-are superfluous
to-day. But-after all, real women were born
to their burden, women were born to put up
with second bests. And also posterity is
mostly a woman's job. But you were born a
man, with a great heritage of honour. You
have kicked that honour away. You have
sold your birthright."
The Quaker was the sort of man in whose
face and mind one could see exactly what his
mother was like. Some men are like that,
and others, one would say, could never have
9ea



<pb n="166"/>
THIS IS THE END
been so intimate with a woman as to be born ,
of her.
"My soul is greater than I am," said
the stranger. "There is no command that
drowns the command of the soul. I cannot
possibly be wrong."
"You could not possibly be right," said
Anonyma. "Good-morning."
Anonyma, on her return to the inn, was
very generous with "word-vignettes" dealing
with Nature. Her Family during supper
was not left in ignorance as to the Peace and
Meaning of the Sea, and the Parallel between
Waves and Generations, and the Miracles of
the Mist, and the Tranquil Musing of the
Beaches, and the Unseen Imminence of the
Downs. " It would make a wonderful back-
ground to a short story," said Anonyma, and
then she stopped rather abruptly.   Her
silence after that might have struck the
Family as strange, had it not coincided with
the arrival of the evening paper, which turned
the listeners' thoughts to less beautiful
matters.
" Air raid," said Cousin Gustus.   "I
prophesied quite a long time ago that we
_ff



<pb n="167"/>
? .I8 TME END
_i'iblher raid, but nobody ever
_|it I say. TWo horses killed
I nia the Eastern Counties."
l ought Somewhere was a town in
ha-ha," said Mrs Russell.
," Was London attacked?" asked Mr.
Russell.  "I'm rather anxious about-St.
Paul's. . .."
Anonyma rose to the surface again. "I
had such a wonderful talk with a 'bus-
conductor once about his experiences during
,::: .  a raid. Such an intelligent man. I dearly
love 'bus conductors, such an interesting and
vivacious class.  I should feel it an honour
to be intimate with one. He told me in the
most vivid terms how a bomb fell in the
. street in front of his 'bus, blowing the pre-
ceding 'bus to atoms. He told me how his
driver turned the 'bus in what he called
'The spice of'arf a crown,' and plunged into
a side street. He said that he could see the
Zeppelin balanced on its searchlights like 'a
sausage on stilts,' and when it was directly
above them, the top of his 'bus was suddenly
cleared of people as if by magic, except for
'  one man who put up an umbrella and 'sat
i ' *                    -



<pb n="168"/>
THIS IS THE END
tight.' I pitied the conductor, it must have
been a terrible experience, his eyes were
starting from his head,-bulging like a rabbit's,
-he said he had a wife and baby up Leyton
way, and that he was so worried about them
that he frequently called out his list of
destinations the wrong way round."
"Look here," said Mr. Russell, "I think
I'd better go up and see about-"
"Nonsense," said his wife. " I refuse to
go to London until the moon is there to
protect me, as it were. So comic to look
upon a heavenly body as a practical protection.
I will not allow you to run needlessly into
danger. Only this morning you were making
plans to go to Cornwall, naughty boy."
"No, but--"
"Darling, I insist," said Mrs. Russell.
"Cornwall it is for the present. If you say
another word I shall smack you and put you
in the corner, ha-ha."
Cornwall it was.
The Family drew near to its destination
on a misty day. The sun shone not at all,
but occasionally showed its bare pale outline
through a veil of cloud. The road in front
I68



<pb n="169"/>
,     :'-:, :      .' IS THE END
w_5  os so dim that Mr. Russell
_M   :^Hi^  :it for himself with imaginations.
_m     < 'knigJUhbt in armour stood at the next
HB,:I* now a phantom sea gleamed over the
e of the road, now he saw great slim
i?: gihosts beckoning him on.
There were real sheep every few hundred
yards, for a sheep fair was taking place some-
where near by. The sheep came out of the
mist like armies of giants, and shrank as they
grew clearer. The roads were rippled with
the footprints of many sheep. Even when
there were no sheep in sight, the mist filled
their places with ghostly flocks.
Each sheep as it passed examined the
wheels -of Christina as long as the dogs
allowed it to do so. Each flock was followed
by two men, and sometimes a chil4 .in ill-
fitting clothes on a pony, and sometimes a
woman with a shawl over her head.
Anonyma's notebook became very restless,
and finally Mr. Russell was obliged to drive
the Family to the point whither the sheep
were bound.
So they went to the little town, through
which the excitement of the fair thrilled like



<pb n="170"/>
THIS IS THE END
the blast from a trumpet. Bewildered shee
looked in at its shop windows; farmers it
dog-carts shouted affectionate remarks t
each other across its village green, and intro-
duced dear friends at a great distance to
other dear friends with  much   formality.
Dogs argued in a professional way about the
merits of their sheep. Mr. Russell's Hound,
who had never before heard the suggestion,
that dogs were intended for any purpose but
ornament, looked on breathless with surprise.
His morals were affected for life by the;
revolutionary sight of a dog biting the tail
of a disobedient sheep.   "I'll try it in
Kensington Gardens," thought Mr. Russell's
Hound, as he looked nervously at his master.
Christina, the motor-car, found her way to
the centre of this activity. There the sheep
bleated in tight confinement, and to each pen
was attached the appropriate dog, looking'
very self-conscious. Dogs who had come
from great distances to buy sheep were,
anxiously sniffing up the smell of their.
purchases, so that no mistake might be made
on the way home. Over the line of pens a
two-plank   viaduct ran, and it was bent'



<pb n="171"/>
WEI;i 'S 8 THE END
B :     %the (weight of large shepherds
t/  heir .way along to take a bird's-eye
poiible bargains.  A   facetious
with the village policeman's arm
his neck was sitting on the wall at the
d of the field, addressing everybody very
frequently as "Gentlemen."  Sheep arrived
and sheep departed constantly.
" Isn't it terribly slavish, somehow ?" said
Anonyma. "The sheep never being consulted
at all. Bought and sold and smelt and spat
upon as if they had no heart beating beneath
that wool. No ' Me,' as Jay used to say."
Mr. Russell heard and remembered. There
were few doubts left in him as to the truth of
his top-funny miracle.
He had a little tune, the scaffolding of a
poem, in his head, and to the sound of it he
lived that day, although I don't expect he
ever got the poem into words.
If you start your idea along an uncertain
course, you have to stop and start afresh to
get it straight. You can never finish it when
once it has a crooked swing. I gather that
motor cyclists occasionally have much the
same experience with their machines.



<pb n="172"/>
THIS IS THE END
But Mr. Russell, with a mind steering a
tangled course, asked for nothing better.
He was very nearly sure of romance for the
first time in his life.
I hope that the feeling of making poetry
is not confined to the people who write it
down. There is no luxury like it, and I
hope we all share it.  I think perhaps the
same thrill that goes through Mr. Russell
and me when the ghost of a completed thing
begins to be seen, also delights the khaki
coster who writes his first-and very likely
last-love-letter from France; and the little
old country mother who lies awake composing
the In Memoriam of her son for a local
paper; and the burglar "down 'Oxton" who
takes off his cap as a child's funeral goes by.
The feeling is: " This is a thing out of my
heart that I am showing. This is my best
confession, and nobody knew there was this
within me." I am sure that that great glory
of poetry in one's heart does not wait on
achievement. If it did, what centuries would
die unglorified. It is just perfection appearing,
to your equal pride and shame, a perfection
that never taunts you with your limitations.



<pb n="173"/>
THIS IS THE END
- '-;   . Russell and Christina knew well their
^'."hi itough the mist that afternoon. There
,;:?'/io: adifficulty in the world, and no need
"   ie ' or to think. The sign-posts all spoke
! ,'~~jnames of fated places. It was useless for
Anonyma to study the map, she found no
mention there of the enchanted way on which
their course was set.
"We will not go through Launceston,"
said Anonyma. "There must be a quicker
way to the sea than that."
Mr. Russell cared not for her and cared
not for Launceston. The spell was cast upon
Christina's wheels. There was no escaping
the appointed way. Launceston reached out
its net and caught them. Almost as far as the
post office, Anonyma was protesting: "We
will NOT go through Launceston."
"Launceston was determined to get us,"
laughed Mrs. Russell.  "Ha-ha! isn't it
humorous the way things happen "
The sun was setting as they first saw the
Cornish sea. The sky was swept suddenly
clear of mist. The seagulls against the sky
were like little crucified angels.
The road ran to the shore.
TN,'



<pb n="174"/>
THIS IS THE END              '
The sun had little delicate clouds across
its face, like the islands in a Japanese paintings
The wet rocks that lay in the sun's path were
plated with gold, and the tall waves withi
shadowed faces made of that path a ladder.,
The fields of foam on the sea looked very:
blue in the pale light.
The sun was like an angel with a flaming 
sword. The angel dipped his feet into the sea. 
The sun was like a flaming stage for the m
comedies of gods. A ship passed dramati-:
cally across it. One's dazzled eyes saw great ;
phantom ships all over the sea.
The sun was like a monster with horns of
fire that pierced one's two eyes. And gradually
it sank.
The sun was like a word written between
the sea and the sky, a word that was swallowed 
up by the sea before any man had time to
read it. There was suddenly no sun. The:i
little forsaken clouds were like flames for a i
moment, and then they were blown out.
Mr. Russell waved his right hand towards
great cliff like the towers of kings behind,
the village.
" This is the place," he said.
I1A



<pb n="175"/>
IF I have dared to surrender some imitation of
splendour,
Something I knew that was tender, something I loved
that was brave,
If in my singing I shewed songs that I heard on my
road,
Were they not debts that I owed rather than gifts that
I gave?
*If certain hours on their climb up the long ladder
of time
Turned my confusion to rhyme, drove me to dare an
attempt,
If by fair chance I might seem sometimes abreast of
me theme,
Was I translating a dream? Was it a dream that you
dreamt 
High and miraculous skies bless and astonish my
eyes;
All my dead secrets arise, all my dead stories come
true.
Here is the Gate to the Sea. Once you unlocked it
for me;
Now, since you gave me the key, shall I unlock it
for you 
TIC



<pb n="176"/>



<pb n="177"/>
e
MAN ought to feel humble when he reflects
upon the fact that he can survive, and even
thrive on, any distress except distress of the
body. God can wither his soul, and still he
lives. Grief can swallow his heart, and still
he lives. But his stomach can kill him.
"All is apparently over between me and
Peace," thought Jay. "But there must be'
something to take the place of Peace."
There is only one thing that can adequately
usurp the place of Peace. But its name did
not occur to Jay.
She did not know what had happened to
her. She felt constantly a little mad. Irre-
sponsible wants clamoured in her breast from
morning till night, and all night the company
of her Secret Friend was more glorious than
ever. She ran to her world as you perhaps run
to church, yet even there she felt expectant.
When a tall tough thundercloud bends



<pb n="178"/>
THIS IS THE END
across the sky I watch for the first flash, and
listen for the first roar, and in my heart still-
ness seems impossible and at the same time
imperative.
So Jay waited, feeling all the time that she
could not wait another minute.
You shall not hear whence comes my fear.
You shall not know the name of it.
But out of strife it came to life,
And only striving came of it.
Though for its sake my heart may break,
Yet worse would I endure for it.
This thing shall be a God to me,
I will not seek a cure for it.
She thought a good deal about Mr. Russell. i
I am sure that he would have laughed pain-i
fully could he have seen the picture of him
self that remained with the 'bus-conductor.!
The picture made him thinner, and his eye
more intelligent, and the line of his mouth
happier, but it did    not make     him   I
younger, because Jay liked him    to be 01Ol
and Wiser.    He never came into the 
World; several times she tried to drag hili
thither, but always at the critical moment    |
got left outside.   Yet I cannot say that i



<pb n="179"/>
THIS IS THE END
her Secret World she missed him; the point
of the bubble enchantment is that there is
nothing lacking in it.
'Bus-conducting is a profession that does
not engross the mind unduly. The eye and
the ear and the hand work by themselves.
Charing Cross whispered in a conductor's ear
at the Bank produces a white ticket from her
hand without any calculation on her part.
She becomes a penny-in-the-slot machine,
with her human brain free for other matters.
She grows a great hatred for all fares above
fourpence, because they need special thought.
Jay filled her day with unsatisfactory
thinking. She found to her surprise that one
may love life and yet also think lovingly of
death. To live is most interesting in an un-
easy way, but to die is to forget at once all
these trivial turbulences, to forget equally the
people you have loved and the people you
have hated, to forget everything you ever
knew, to be alone, and to be no longer
disturbed by unceasing voices.
At this time I think Jay felt more hatred
of everybody than love of any one person.
But then, of course, she had vowed to Chloris



<pb n="180"/>
#   ~   THIS IS THE END
after the affair with young William Morgan
that she would never fall in love again. She
said, "I have been through love. It is not a
sea, as people say. It is only a river, and I
have waded through it."
" Yet there is certainly something very re-
markable about that man," she thought. "I
don't believe I like him much, I don't want
to know him better, though I should like him
to know me. I believe he is my real next of
kin. I believe he has a Secret World too."
She was on her last homeward journey,
and it was one of her early days. The hours
of a conductor move up and down the day.
Sometimes Jay punctured her first ticket at a
time when you and I are asleep, and when the
coster-barrows, waving with ferns and fuchsias,,
move up the Strand like Birnam    Wood
moving to Dunsinane. On those days she
was due home at half-past four or so. OnJ
other days she was able to have a late break
fast and to darn her stockings after it, bi
that meant that she did not get home till v
late. Some 'buses, I gather, are called "sin
'buses," but in this case the word does 
imply celibacy alone.  The single 'bus, ,



<pb n="181"/>
THIS IS THE END
occupied by one conductor all day long for a
fortnight. The "double 'bus" is shared by
two conductors, one presiding in the morning
and the other in the afternoon. The double
state also lasts a fortnight; it is arranged as
an opportunity for lady 'bus-conductors to
recuperate after the rigours (the more re-
munerative rigours) of service on a single
'bus. These statements of mine are open
to extensive correction. Jay's hours always
struck me as so very confusing that it is un-
likely I should be able to retail the informa-
tion correctly. However, it doesn't matter
very much.
This was one of the early days on a double
'bus, and Jay was on her last journey, with
several restless waking hours between her and
possible sleep. Her 'bus was full, but not
pressed down and running over. For the
moment everybody in it was provided with a
ticket. Jay was laboriously thinking small
thoughts because she was tired of thinking of
Love and Life and other things with capital
letters.
She thought of the various indignities to
which the public submits its 'bus-tickets.
181



<pb n="182"/>
THIS IS THE END
Some people use the ticket as a toothpick,
some put spectacles on and read it without
understanding, some decorate outstanding
features of the 'bus with it. But I myself
tear it gradually into small strips, and grind
the strips by means of massage into fine
powder. If the inspector comes, I am per-
fectly willing to pour the powder into his
hand, and yet he often seems annoyed.
Jay reviewed the perspective of faces that
lined her 'bus. They were all ugly, and not
one of them was eager. The British public
as a whole considers a deaf, dumb, and blind
expression the only decent one to wear in
a public conveyance. We roar through a
wonderful and exciting world, and all the
while we sit with glazed eyes and cotton-wool
in our ears, and think about ourselves. They
were mostly men in Jay's 'bus at that moment;
they were almost all alike, and all insignificant,
but not one of them knew it. Such a lot of
men could never be loved by women, only
found expedient.
But there was a sailor, a simple sub-
lieutenant, sitting by the door. Sailors are
a race apart. They have twisty faces, their i



<pb n="183"/>
''         looi.S THE END
fnl ,e look curiously accidental.
iithey are rarely seen without a
a"l or a London Opinion in their
Ther1   is something about a sailor
onduces to sentiment in every passer-by,
·nd- Jay, who was fleeing from    that very
feeling, looked hastily at some one else. Her
seeking eye lit on a lady who had a complete
skunk climbing up the nape of her neck, and
a hat of the approximate size of a five-
shilling piece worn over her right eyebrow.
She looked such a fool that Jay concluded
that the look was intentional, and indeed I
suppose it must be, for the worst insult you
can offer to young ladies of this type is to
suggest that they have brains. Jay pondered
on this, and then turned elsewhere for in-
spiration. All roads of thought at that time
led to one destination, so she only allowed
herself to go a little way along each road.
And presently she reached the end of her
journey. She walked home, and Chloris was
as usual waiting for her just outside the
rocking-horse factory at the corner. Jay, as
she passed that factory every day, watched
with interest the progress of the grey ghost
Tgi



<pb n="184"/>
THIS IS THE END
rocking-horses, eyeless, maneless, and tailless,
as they ripened hourly into a form more like
that of the friend of youth.
She smelt the little smell that is always
astray in Mabel Place, she heard outside in
the damp afternoon two rival barrow-men
howling a cry that sounded like "One pound
hoo-ray! " A neighbour in the garden was
exchanging repartee with a gentleman caller.
"Biby, siy Naughty Man, Biby, tell 'im what
a caution 'e is."  But there seemed little
hope that the baby would. These sounds
were provided with the constant Brown
Borough background of shouts and quarrels
and laughter and children crying and in-
numerable noises of work.
"Something has happened," said Jay to
Chloris, as they went in. "I feel as if I had
no friends to-night.  Not even a Secret
Friend."
Chloris lay on her lap in her usual attitude,
bent into a circle like a tinned tongue.
Chloris knew it was no use worrying about
these things.
"Funny," thought Jay.    "King David
was a healthy man of ruddy countenance, and
184



<pb n="185"/>
THIS IS THE ENb
presumably he never lived in the Brown
Borough, yet he knew very well what it feels
like to iive a temperature, and a sore heart,
il to be alone in lodgings. Whenever I am
t;ity tired, it is funny how my heart quotes
/  thise tired Psalms of his, without my brain
St remembering  the words.   I wonder how
David knew."
The little house was empty but for her.
I ought perhaps to have told you before that
Nana .had been taken ill a month or so ago,
and had gone away at Jay's expense to a South
Coast Home.
"I'll go round and see Mrs. 'Ero Edwards,"
said Jay, when she had changed into mufti.
"Neither Chloris nor David is adequate to
the moment."
The ground-floor back room of Mrs. 'Ero
Edwards was crowded. The Chap from the
Top Floor was there, and Mrs. Dusty
Morgan, and little Mrs. Love from Tann
Street, and Mrs. 'Ero Edwards's daughter,
Queenie, and several people's children. Con-
v;rsation never wavered as Jay knocked and
came in. When you find that your entrance
no longer fills a Brown Borough room with
*0-



<pb n="186"/>
THIS IS THE END 
sudden silence, you may be glad and kno,
that you have ceased to be a lidy or a toff. 
The Chap from the Top Floor was talking
and everybody else was there to hear him doi
it, except Mrs. 'Ero Edwards who could
hardly bear it, because she only liked listening
to herself. Jay sat modestly in a corner andc
listened, like the other representatives of her
generation.
The Chap from the Top Floor was an
Older and Wiser Man. His wife could not
live with him, but he was very kind and
fatherly to every one else, and Jay was rather
fond of him.    He was about fifty, and
anything but beautiful.  Also the C.O.S.
would not have admired him. But I believe
he did a good deal of thinking inside that
bristly head of his.
" Ow my dear," said Mrs. 'Ero Edwards,
laying a fat hand on Jay's knee. " We're all
so 'appy. Dusty's wrote to siy 'e's got the
sack from the Army becos of 'is rheumatics.
We're 'avin' a bit of a beano becos of it."
Everybody smiled at Jay, and her heart
grew warmer. Some one handed her a cupj
of tea sweetened with half an inch of sugar
T                   -



<pb n="187"/>
I:~5 '"'       THIS IS THE END
, at the bottom of the cup. The spoon had
been plunged to its hilt in condensed milk.
What vulgar tastes she had !
" You can never mike a pal of a woman,"
said the Chap from the Top Floor, continuing
an argument for the benefit of an audience of
women.   "One feller an' another-well-a
pal's a pal. But women are all either wives
or-   , there ain't no manner of palliness in
them."
"'Tain't gentlemanly to talk so, Elbert,"
said Mrs. ']ro Edwards. " Yore mother was
a woman, an' from 'er comes all you know,
I'm thinkin', an' all you are. Women is
pals with women, an' men is pals with men.
It's only when men an' women gets assorted-
like that palliness drops out."
"'Usbinds an' wives can be pals," said
Mrs. Dusty. " Me an' Dusty useter 'ave a
drop an' a jaw together every night for three
months after we married.    Never 'ad a
thought apart, we didn't."
"If I ars't Dusty," said the Top Floor
Chap, "1 don't know but what 'e wouldn't
tell a different tile."
"'Ere, 'bus-conductor, you can talk, an'



<pb n="188"/>
THIS IS THE END 
you're a suffragette," said  Mrs. Dust
"Ain't bein' a pal just as much a woman'
job as a man's ? "
" What is bein' a pal ? " asked Mrs. Love
bitterly. "'Avin' some one 'oo drinks wiv
you until she's sick, and then blacks your,
eye for you. There ain't no pals, men or
women."
"I think they're rare," said Jay. "Isn't 
being a pal just refusing to admit a limit ?)
Some people draw the line at a murderer, and
some at a suffragette, and some at a vegetarian, '
and some at a lady who wears the same dress
Sundays and week-days, but a real pal draws
no line. Women and dogs as well as men
can be faithful beyond limit, I think, but it's i
very rare in anybody."
"'Bus-conductors don't know nothink," 
said the Chap from the Top Floor in a loud 
belligerent voice, illuminated by an amiable
smile. "I orfen look at 'bus-conductors, an'
think, 'Pore devils, they don't know 'arf of O
life, not even a quarter. They only meets ;
the harisocracy wot 'as pennies to frow about, '
they never passes the time of day with a plain !
walkin' feller like me wot ses 'is mind an' i
T sr                  ,



<pb n="189"/>
THIS IS THE END
never puts on no frills.  'Bus-conducting
oughter be done by belted earls an' suchlike,
it ain't a real man's job. Pore devils,' I ses,
lookin' at 'em bouncin' along, doin' the pretty
to all the nobs, wivout so much as puttin'
their toe in the mud. 'Pore devils.' "
"'Ere Elbert, 'old your jaw," said the
tactful Mrs. 'Ero Edwards, nervous lest Jay
should resent this insult to her calling. " Let's
all go roun' to the Cross'n Beetle, an' see
whether that won't stop 'is noise."
"After all, it's Dusty's birfdiy," said Mrs.
Dusty with alacrity.
The day was evidently growing in im-
portance every minute.
"You come along too," said little Mrs.
Love, suddenly putting her hand in Jay's.
"No treatin' nowadiys," said the Top
Floor Chap amiably. "But I don't mind
'andin' around the price of a drink before we
start."
He only extended half-hearted generosity
to Jay, because she was, after all, a 'bus-con-
ductor, and to that extent a nob. She shook
her head and laughed, when he held out to
her the Law-circumventing coin.
TRI



<pb n="190"/>
THIS IS THE END             I
Mrs. 'Ero Edwards only really found sc
for her voice out of doors. No sooner 
she in the street than she seized the arm
the Chap from the Top Floor and shouted
him down, as she led him towards the Cross'A
Beetle.
Mrs. Dusty and young Queenie walked
arm in arm behind them, and whenever
they saw a soldier they squeaked loudly,
and addressed him invariably as "Colonel
Mawmajuke."
Jay and little Mrs. Love, both rather
confused and unhappy people, walked hand
in hand a little way behind.
"We needn't go as fur as the Cross'n
Beetle, if we don't like," said Mrs. Love.
"They'll never notice if we 'ook it."
"I don't want to 'ook it," said Jay. "1
want to keep very busy listening to noisy
people. I don't want to hear myself think."
"You're mopey, eh ?" asked Mrs. Love
gently.
"I'm  cold," said Jay.  "I believe I've
lost something. I believe I've lost a friend
of mine."
" Friends is always gettin' lost," said Mrs.



<pb n="191"/>
THIS IS THE END
Love. "I told you so. Let's go an' 'ave a
look at the pictures. They've got the ' Curse
of a Crook' on up the street. Fairly mike
yer 'air curl."
"I want noise," said Jay, "a much louder
noise than that old piano. The pictures are
so horribly quiet.  Just an underfed man
turning a handle, and an underfed woman
hitting an underfed piano. At a play you
can at least"pretend that the actors are having
a little fun too, but the pictures-there's only
two sad people without smiles at the bottom
of it all. I won't go to the pictures, I'll go
and get drunk."
":,:. " Come on then," said Mrs. Love. " You
"i:';"fLt find no lost friends there, but come on.
:   Fi:l be yer pal for to-night. You've been a
pal to me before now. We're temp'ary pals
right enough, there ain't no permanent kind.
You won't find no shivers straying around
in the ole Cross'n Beetle. Let's 'urry, an'
I get drunk, and keep 'and in 'and all the time.
That's wot pals oughter do."
Jay suddenly saw the whole world as a
thing running away from its thoughts. The
crowd that filled the pavement was fugitive,
IgI



<pb n="192"/>
THIS IS THE END
and every man felt the hot breath of fear 
the back of his neck. One only used ones
voice for the drowning of one's thoughts
one only used one's feet for running awaj
The whole world was in flight along the en
less streets, and the lucky ones were in tram
and donkey carts that they might flee th
faster.
"Hurry, hurry," said Jay. And shan
little Mrs. Love ran hand in hand./
The Chap from the Top F or and Mr
'Ero Edwards were already leading society 
the Cross'n Beetle when Jay and Mrs. Lov
reached it. The barman knew Mrs. Edwards
too well to think that she was drunk already,
but you or I, transported suddenly thitheri
would have supposed that her beano was ov
instead of yet to come.
"'Elbert," said  Mrs. 'Ero   Edwar
"yo're an 'Un, yo're an internal alien, thet''
what's the metter with you. I wonder
'aven't blacked yer eye for you many a tim
and oft."
There was almost enough noise even fo
Jay, and she and Mrs. Love, each armed wi
a generously topped glass, sat in the bad



<pb n="193"/>
THIS IS THE END
ground, on the shiny seat that lined the
wall.
To Jay this evening was an experiment,
an experiment born of weariness of a well-
worn road. She watched Mrs. Love blow
some of the superfluous froth on to the floor,
and did likewise. Directly she had put her
lips to the thick brim of her glass she knew
that here was the stuff of which certain
dreams are made.
She had, I suppose, the weakest head in
the worfd, and in three minutes she was
giddy and much comforted.      The noise
seemed to clothe itself in a veil of music,
there was hope in the shining brightness that
shone from  the bar.   The placards that
looked like texts and were advertisements of
various drinks, seemed like jokes to Jay.
"There are only dreams," she thought
very lucidly, "to keep our souls alive. We
are lucky if we get good dreams. We'll
never get anything better."
Through the glass between the patriotic
posters that darkened the windows she could
see the morbid colour of London air.
"Apart from dreams," thought this 'bus-



<pb n="194"/>
THIS IS THE END
conducting Omar Khayyam, "there is nothing
but disappointment. We expected too much.
We expected satisfaction. There is nothing
in the world but second bests, but dreams are
an excellent second best. Our last attitude
must be ' How interesting, but how very far
from what I wanted. . .'"
The speed of time, and the hurry of life
suddenly rushed upon her again.
"I must hurry," she said. "Or I shan't ]
have lived before I die. I must hurry."
"No   'urry, Jine,"  said  Mrs. Love.
"Let's keep in the light for a bit."
"Is this the only light left us, after a
deluge of War ?" thought Jay. " It doesn't
matter, because of course War is hurrying
too. Rushing over our heads like the sea
over drowned sailors. But it will be over in
a minute; this new kind of death must be
a temporary death for temporary 'soldiers.
What do fifty years without friends matter ?
You can hardly breathe before they're done."
She was dazzled and deafened. She had
emptied her glass, and she did not know
what steps she took to fill it again. Only
she found it was suddenly full.           "
I94



<pb n="195"/>
THIS IS THE END
And in a minute she was on the path to
the House by the Sea. She had come by a
new way.
There was less colour than usual about the
sea, a certain air of guilt seemed to haunt
the path. And it was extraordinarily lonely,
there seemed to be no promise of a Friend
waiting at the other end of the path.
She sang the Loud Song to encourage
herself, but she did not sing it very loudly.
There is no dream like my dream,
Even in Heaven.
There is no Friend like my Friend,
Even in Heaven.
There is no life like my life,
Even in Heaven.
A voice said, "For 'eaven's sike, Jine,
don't begin to sing."
Jay laughed. "Treating me as if I were
drunk . .    " she thought. She did not
feel giddy any more. She could see the
familiar outline of the House against an
unpretentious sky, and that calm shape
n steadied her.
No breath of sound came from the House.
The sky was grey, the sea was grey, there
I95



<pb n="196"/>
THIS IS THE END 
was no hint of sunlight. As Jay came to thie
door she noticed that the honeysuckle in thei'
bowl at the hall window was still there, but
dead. The wind had strewn the doorstep
with leaves and straws and twigs, little
refugees of the air.
In the hall there was an old woman,
dressed in a black dress patterned with big
red flowers. She was knitting. Her stiff
skirts spread out in angular folds round her.
Jay knew she was a fellow-ghost, because
their eyes met.
Jay felt swallowed up by the silence. She
could not speak, even to think, she felt, would
be too noisy. The stiff skirt of the old lady
made no rustle, the knitting needles made no
click. But Jay could see that she was count-
ing.  The House seemed to be full of
unmoving time. Outside the rain began to
fall, and that grey sound enclosed the silence
of the House.
After a very long time Jay spoke.
"Where is my Friend ?" she asked.
"Gone'to the War," answered the old
woman.
"There is no War in this world," said Jay.
_A4:



<pb n="197"/>
THIS IS THE END
"On the contrary," the fellow-ghost
replied, "war is, even here, where Time is
not.  War is like air, in every house, in
every land, on every sea. For ever."
Between her sentences she counted. Un-
pausing numbers moved her lips.
"On these shores," she said, "time and
Life and the sea go up and down. Eternity
has no logic. Trhere are no reasons, there is
no explanation. But there is always War.
There are fighting sea men in the caves on the
beach. Haven't you seen them, the dark sea
people ?  Haven't you heard their high voices
that were tuned to cut through the voice of
· :   stea ? Haven't you found their very wide,
A' ~     footprints in the sand ? Have you
Ri~  d through this world? "
' said  Jay, "I remember.     The
.iorate their hair with seaweed, pink
green. I have watched them catch fish
iith their hands. I have watched them put
their babies to play in the pools among the
ocks.. . . ."
"On the cliffs," said the fellow-ghost,
men clad in armour share the camps of the
Englishmen who fought at Cressy, and at
Vtl



<pb n="198"/>
THIS IS THE END
Waterloo, and at the Marne. On these seas
the most ancient pirates sing and laugh in
chorus with Nelson's drowned sailors, and with
men from the North Sea, men whose mothers
still cry in the night for them. Did you
think there was any seniority in Eternity ?"
"But I don't understand," said Jay.
"Time seems to leave itself behind sc
quickly. .. .
"There is nothing to understand," said
the old woman. "There is no explanation.
Time does not move. Men move." The
noise of the rain seemed to wash out every-
thing but remembrance, and there was n<
feeling in Jay but a terrible longing to have
her Secret Friend with her again, and tha
long secret childhood of theirs, and to wipe
out half her days and all her knowledge, ant
to hear once more those songs upon the sand
of the cove, and to feel the tingling groun<
of the sunny hills.
"My Friend has never forsaken m
before," she said.
She felt a hand press her hand, and sh
met the eyes of little Mrs. Love.
" Yo're a mousey sort of kid," said Mr



<pb n="199"/>
THIS IS THE END
Love, "sittin' there as if you was in church.
Shall we go 'ome? The rine's gettin' worse
an' worse, an' it's no good wytin'. I'll see
you 'ome."
When Jay, very wet and dazed, reached
Eighteen Mabel Place, she found a card
pushed under the door. The name on it was
Mr. Herbert Russell's, and there was a sug-
gestion in a'beautiful little handwriting on
the back of it that she should ring him up
next morning and tell him when to come and
see her, as he had a message from her brother.
"This is the sort of thing that couldn't
possibly happen in real life," said Jay. "I
must be drunk after all. On no doorstep
except Heaven's could one find a message so
romantic."
She was instinctively disobedient to Older
and Wiser people. She never entertained the
idea of telephoning. She could imagine Mr.
Russell answering the telephone in a prosaic
voice like a double bass. She wrote the
following letter:
DEAR SIR-Don't you remember, I was to
meet you anyway on the steps of St. Paul's at ten
ItO



<pb n="200"/>
THIS IS THE END 
o'clock next Sunday ?  I will wait till then for the
message.-Yours faithfully, ' 
JANE ELIZABETH MARTIN,
'Bus-conductor.
"That letter ought to put two and two
together for him," she thought, "if he hasn't
done it already.   It's a complicated 'little
sum, and the result is-what ?"
She felt hot and feverish when she wrote
the letter. And directly she had posted it
she regretted having done so.
"I forget what I wrote," she said. "It is
dangerous to post letters to Older and Wiser
Men when drunk."
All that night she lay awake and mourned
the desertion of her Secret Friend.



<pb n="201"/>
You promised War and Thunder and Romance.
You promised true, but we were very blind,
And very young, and in our ignorance
We never called to mind
That truth is seldom kind.
You promised love, immortal as a star.
You promised true, yet how the truth can lie !
For now we grope for hands where no hands are,
And, deathless, still we cry,
Nor hope for a reply.
You promised harvest and a perfect yield.
You promised true, for on the harvest morn,
Behold a reaper strode across the field,
And man of woman born
Was gathered in as corn.
You promised honour and ordeal by flame.
You promised true. In joy we trembled lest
We should be found unworthy when it came;
But-oh-we never guessed
The fury of the test.
201



<pb n="202"/>
THIS IS THE END 
You promised friends and songs and festivals.
You promised true. Our friends, who still are young,
Assemble for their feasting in those halls
Where speaks no human tongue. 
And thus our songs are sung. 
202



<pb n="203"/>
I HAVE very rarely found Sunday in London
a successful day.  I hate idleness without
peace, and festivity without beauty, and noise
without music. I hate to see London people
in unnatural clothes.  I hate to see a city
holding its breath.
Jay waited ten minutes on the steps of St.
Paul's for Mr. Russell. This was not because
he was late, but because she was early; and
this again was not because she was indecently
eager, but because she had hit on an un-
expectedly non-stop 'bus. She felt a fool for
ten minutes. And when you have waited ten
minutes on those enormous steps under the
eye of the pigeons, you will know why she
felt a fool.
--1Ir. Russell arrived in Christina the motor
car, and simultaneously a shower fell. From
the first moment Jay felt unsuccess in the air
of that much-anticipated day. She was intro-
203



<pb n="204"/>
THIS IS THE END 
duced to Christina, and said, "But we can'
take that thing into the Cathedral." 
"We don't want to," said Mr. Russell,
although, as he was a born driver, the challenge
made him instinctively measure with his eye !
the depth of the steps, and the width of the
doorway, from  Christina's point of view. 
"We don't want to pray. We want to talk."
Anonyma would have been astonished to
hear him say this.
" As a matter of fact," said Jay, "I brought
Chloris for the same reason."
Chloris was eating the bread which a kind
but short-sighted old lady believed herself to
be giving to the pigeons.
Mr. Russell had hardly been able to imagine
his 'bus-conductor in any dress but that of
her calling. Now that he saw her in un-
ambitious London-coloured things, he was
glad to notice that her clothes were not Sunday
clothes, but the sort that you forget about
directly you look away from them.
This was the sort of day that breaks up
delusions, and as Christina the motor car
started away, Jay discovered that her hat was
not adequately attached to her head. There
OflA



<pb n="205"/>
THIS IS THE END
are few discoveries more depressing than this
at the beginning of a day of movement.
The bells of St. Paul's began to sing.
Little fairy bells dodged behind and about the
great notes. But Christina soon swept the
sound into the forgotten air behind her.
" I've got a lot to talk to you about," said
Mr. Russell as he headed Christina Hackney-
way. He was conscious that he was taking
his miracle curiously for granted. I don't
think he really believed in it yet. For Mr.
Russell all truth was haunted by the ghost of
a clanking lie. He discerned deceit on the
part of Providence where no deceit was. " I'll
give you your brother's message first, because
it interests me personally least. He is gone.
There was a sudden move across the Channel
last week, and he went-I suppose-ten days
ago now. The message he hadn't time to
give you was an appeal to give up 'bus-con-
ducting.  He had an absurd idea that you
walked out with men-conductors in Victoria
Park."
f      "Not at all absurd," said Jay. "Not half
so absurd as the idea of driving out with a
casual fare.  I know some delightful con-
20o



<pb n="206"/>
THIS IS THE END
ductors and drivers; we joke together when
the traffic sticks. There is one perfect darling
called Edward; his only fault is that he drive
a mere Steamer. But we always bow, and
once when a horse fell down and we got hung
up for twenty minutes in the Strand, he sanx
me a little song about a star."
Mr. Russell listened to all this very
attentively, and then continued: "YouI
brother wants you to go back to your Family.
His last words to me about it were that ii
you could manage to be ladylike for three
years or the duration of War, at the end ol
that time he and you would go and live by
your two selves in New Zealand, and if you
liked you need wear no skirts at all there, but
riding breeches all the time."
"Ladylike I" snorted Jay. "What's the
use of ladyliquity even for five minutes? Sc
Kew sent you as an antidote ? I suppose he
didn't know you were one of my fares ?"
"A fare," said Mr. Russell sententiously,
"may, I suppose, be a wonderful revelation,
because you only see your fare's eyes for a
second, and the things you may see have no
limit, and you never know the silly little truth
-A4



<pb n="207"/>
THIS IS THE END
about him. Yet even so, there is more than
a ticket and a look between you and me, and
you know it."
" Possibly there is a Secret World between
you and me," said Jay. "But that's a pretty
big thing to divide us."
"Supposing it doesn't divide us?" said
Mr. Russell, looking fiercely at the road in
front of him. " Supposing it showed me how
much I love you ? "
"How disappointigl" said Jay in the
worst of possible taste. (She was like that
to-day.)  "You're ceasing to be an Older
and Wiser, and trying to become an ordinary
Nearah and Dearah."
("Oh, curse," she thought in brackets.
"I shall kick myself to-night.")
"That's a horrid thing to say," said Mr.
Russell. " But still I do love you."
"It sounds very Victorian and nice," said
Jay, wondering if he could still see her
through her veil of bad temper.   "But,
you know, in spite of Secret Worlds, and
secret souls, and centuries of secret know-
ledge, we still have to keep up this 1916
farce, and leave something of ourselves in
207



<pb n="208"/>
THIS IS THE END 
sensible London. How do I know you'r
not married ?"                          i
Mr. Russell thought for a very long tim
indeed, and then said, "I am."
Jay was not very well brought up. Sh
did not stop the car and step out with dignity:
into respectable Hackney. She was just silent 
for a long time.
"As you were," she said to herself, when
she found herself able to think again. " This ;
is a bad day, but it will be over in something 
less than a hundred years."
"You drive well," she said presently,
looking with relief from Mr. Russell's face
to his hands. Christina the motor car and 
two 'buses were just then indulging in a figure
like the opening steps of the Grand Chain.
"You drive as though driving were poetry
and every mile a verse."
"After all," she told herself, "the man
loves me, and I must at least take an intelli-
gent interest in him."
"Are you a poet ?" she added.
Nobody had ever asked Mr. Russell this
question before, and not knowing the answer
to it, he did not answer.
<<f



<pb n="209"/>
THIS IS THE END
"I have never written a line of poetry,"
said Jay. "Or rather, I have several times
written a line, but never another line to fit it.
Yet because. I have a Friend,-I know in
what curious and extended order the verses
come, and how the tunes come first, and the
various voices next, and the words last, and
how a good rhyme warms you like a fire, and
how the tunes fall away when the thing is
finished,'and how ready-made it all is really,
and yet how tired you feel. .. ."
To Mr. Russell it all seemed true, and
part of the miracle. He had nothing to add,
and therefore added nothing.
"Obviously you are a poet," said Jay.
"You have a poetic look."
"What look is that ?" asked Mr. Russell,
much pleased. It was twenty years since he
had even remembered that he possessed a
look of his own.
" A silly sullen look," said Jay. Presently
she added: " But it must have been disappoint-
ing to find yourself a poet in Victorian times.
I always think of you Olders and Wisers as
coming out of your stuffy nineteenth century
into our nice new age with a sigh of relief."
200             P



<pb n="210"/>
THIS IS THE END 
"Oh no," said Mr. Russell. "You m
remember that when we were born into it, 
became our nice new age, and therefore to 
there is no age like it." 
"It seems incredible," said Jay.  "Di
Older and Wiser people ever live violently
ever work-work hard-until their brain
were blind and they cried because they werez
so tired ? Did they ever get drowned in seas
full of foaming ambitions? Did they ever
fight without dignity but with joy for a-
cause ? Did they ever shout and jump with 
joy in their pyjamas in the moonlight? Did.
they ever feel just drunk with being young,
and in at the start ? And were Older and
Wiser people's jokes ever funny ? "
"We were fools often," said Mr. Russell.
"Once, when I was fifteen, I bit my hand-
and here is the scar-because I thought I had
found a new thing in life, and I thought I
was the first discoverer. But as to jokes,
you are on very dangerous ground there.
One's sense of humour is a more tender point
than one's heart, especially an Older and
Wiser sense of humour. You know, we
think the jokes of your nice new age not half
210



<pb n="211"/>
THIS IS THE END
so funny as ours. But as neither you nor 1
make jokes, that obstacle need not come
between us."
"Oh, I think difference of date is never
in itself an obstacle," said Jay. "Time is
not important enough to be an obstacle."
"You and I know that," said Mr. Russell.
A little unnoticed knot of Salvationists
surprised jay at a distance by singing the
tune of a sentimental song popular five years
ago, and then they surprised her again, as she
passed them, and heard the words to which
the tune was being sung. Brimstone had
usurped the place of the roses in that song,
and the love left in it was not apparently the
kind of love that Hackney understands.
"Why don't they sing the old hymn
tunes?" asked Jay. "Or tunes like 'Abide
with Me '-not very old or very good, but
worn down with devotion like the steps of an
old church? Why do they take the drama
out of it all ?"
j.   Chloris at that moment introduced drama
into the drive by jumping out of the back
seat of Christina. I must, I suppose, admit
that Chloris was not Really Quite a Lady.



<pb n="212"/>
THIS IS THE END 
On the contrary, motor 'buses were the o
motors she knew. She mistook the estima
Christina for a deformed motor 'bus,
when she smelt Victoria Park, she jumped>
out. Even for Chloris this was an unsucce
ful day. A flash of yelping lightning caught
the tail of Jay's eye, and she looked round to6
see her dignified dog, upside down, skid
violently down a steep place into the gutter,;
and there disappear beneath the skirt of as
female stranger who was poised upon the kerb.,i
Unhurt, but probably    blushing  furiously;
beneath her fur over her own vulgarity,.
Chloris was retrieved, and spent the rest of
the drive in wiping all traces of the accident.
off her ribs on to the cushions of Christina.'
I am glad that Mr. Russell's Hound was not
there to witness poor Chloris's unsophisticated
confession of caste.
"Where are we going ?" asked Jay, when :
she was calm again.
"God knows where       . ." saidiMr. 
Russell.
"I'm always coming across districts of
that name," said Jay severely.   "I often:
direct my enquiring fares to the region of



<pb n="213"/>
THIS IS THE END
God Knows Where. It is most unsatisfying.
Where are we going ?"
"On for ever," said Mr. Russell. "Out
of the world.    To the House by the
Sea."
"Then will you please set me down at
Baker's Arms? " said Jay. "Do you know,
by the way, that Anonyma always says 'Stay'
to a 'bus, if she remembers in time not to say
'Hi, stop,' like a common person."
She was talking desperately against failure,
but it seemed a doomed day, and nothing she
could think of seemed worth saying.
"I want to talk to you about your House
by the Sea," said Mr. Russell. "You know
I found it."
"Don't tell me any facts," implored Jay.
"Don't tell me you pressed half a crown into
the palm of the oldest and wisest inhabitant,
and found out facts about some nasty young
man who was born in seventeen something,
and lived in a place called Atlantic View, and
wore curls and a choky stock, and fought at
Waterloo, and lies in the village church
under a stone monstrosity. Don't tell me
facts, because I know they will bar me for



<pb n="214"/>
t  i * i*                 '  /  a
THIS IS THE END 
ever out of my House by the Sea. Facts 
contraband there."
"There is no House by that Sea now,
said Mr. Russell.  "A   slate quarry h
devoured the headland on which it used 
stand. Where the House used to be there ii
air now. I daresay the ghosts you knew s
trace out the shape of the House in the air."'!
"The ghosts I know," corrected Jayf
"Don't put it in the past."
"It's all in the past," said Mr. Russell.
"It's all a dream, and an echo, and the ghostl
of the day before yesterday."
"How do you know ?" asked Jay. "How
can you tell it's not 1916 that's the ghost? "
She had been taught by her Friend to take!
very few things for granted, and time least
of all.
"I asked you to tell me no facts," she
added.
"I'll only tell you two," persisted Mr.
Russell.  "One is that they have in the 
church near the quarry a dark wooden figure 
of a saint, with the raised arm broken, and 
straight draperies. I saw it, and they toldc
me what I knew already, that it came out of



<pb n="215"/>
THIS IS THE END
the hall of a house that was drowned in the
sea. The other fact is a story that the tobac-
conist told me, about a wriggly ladder, and
stone balls, and the Law. In the tobacconist's
childhood they found the stone balls at the
foot of the cliff in the sand. That story, too,
I knew already.   Quite apart from  your
letters, you little secret friend, J knew the
face of that sea directly I saw it."
"But how did you know? How dared
you know ?"
"Oh well," said Mr. Russell, "you asked
me to tell you no facts."
Mr. Russell was not observant. He was
not sufficiently alive to be observant. He
was much occupied in remembering phantom
yesterdays, and I do not think he listened
very much to what the 'bus-conductor said.
He only enjoyed the sound of her voice,
which he remembered. So he did not know
that she was unhappy.
They came presently to a separate part of
the forest, which is impaled upon a straight
white road. The earth beneath the trees was
caught in a mesh of shadows. The trees are
high and vaulted there, but the forest is very
215



<pb n="216"/>
THIS IS THE END               1
reticent. The detail of its making is so smi
that you can only see it if you lie down
your face. Do this and you can see the greei
threads of the earth's material woven acrosc
the skeletons of last year's leaves. You can
see the little lawns of moss and weeds, too
small to name, that make the way brilliant
for the ants. You can watch the heroic
armoured beetles defying their world. Yoi
can cover with a leaf the great open-air public
meeting-places of six-legged things. You can
see the spiders at work on their silver cranes,
you can watch the bold elevated activities of
the caterpillars. You can feel the scattered
grasses stroke your eyelids, you can hear the
low songs of fairies among the roots of the
trees. All these things you may enjoy if you
lie down, but the forest does not show them
to you. The forest pays you the great com-
pliment of ignoring you, and it does not cart
whether you see its intimate possessions or
not. I think perhaps no day is really unsuc-
cessful that gives you forest earth against
your forehead, and forest grass between yout
fingers, and high forest trees to stand between
you and the ultimate confession of failure.



<pb n="217"/>
THIS IS THE END
Jay and Mr. Russell boarded out Christina
the motor car for the day at an inn, and then
they sat and gradually introduced themselves
to the forest. Showers fell on their hatless
heads, and they did not notice. A mole rose
like a submarine from the waves of the forest
earth, and they did not notice. The butter-
flies danced like little tunes in the sunlit
clearing, and they did not notice.  And
.from a long way off, near the swings, holiday
shrieks trailed along the wind, and they did
not notice.
Jay told Mr. Russell, one by one, small
unmattering things that she remembered out
of her Secret World, and each time when she
had told him he wondered with regret why he
had not remembered it by himself. He had
never thought it worth while to remember
before; his imagination was crippled, and
needed crutches. He had not thought it
worth while to think much about the time
when he was young, the time when his past
had been as big and shining as his future.
The longer we live, it seems, the less we re-
member, and no men and few women normally
possess a secret story after thirty. It would



<pb n="218"/>
THIS IS THE END 
not matter so much if you only lost y
story, a worse fate than loss befalls it-y^
laugh at it. It is curious how the wor
draws in as one gets older and wiser. T
past catches one up, the future burns away li
a candle. I used to think that growing u
was like walking from one end of a meadow
to the other, I thought that the meadow
would remain, and one had only to turn one's
head to see it all again. But now I know.i
that growing up is like going through a door'
into a little room, and the door shuts behind'i
one..
I think Mr. Russell's point of difference.
from most older and wiser people was that he j
had not forgotten the excitement of writingi'
down snatches of his secret story as it came to 
him, and the passion of tearing up the thing.
that he wrote, and the delight of finding that "
he could not tear it out of his heart. He 
was a sileU   person, and a rather neglected
person, and unbusinesslike, and unsuccessful,
and uncultured, and unsociable, and unbeauti-:
ful. So there was nothing worse than empti- i
ness where his secret story used to be. Hell
had not found it worth while to fill the space,, 
218



<pb n="219"/>
THIS IS THE END
He had not found it worth while to shut the
door.
"Do you remember that Christmas," said
Jay, "when there was a blizzard, and a great
sea, and the foam blinded the western windows
of the House, and the children went out to
sing ' Love and joy come to you'? (Those
aren't real words any more now, are they?
only pretty caricatures.) And when the chil-
dren came in with snow and foam plastered
up their windward sides, do you remember
that one of them said,' Is this what Lot's wife
felt like ?'"
"I can just remember Love and Joy mixed
up with the wind at the window," said Mr.
Russell. "But always best of all I can re-
member the way you looked on . . ."
"Me?" said Jay.    I wasn't there."
"Oh yes you were, and that's what you
forget. You were there always, and when I
was looking for the House I believe it was
always you I was expecting to find there."
"Me    Me, with this same old face ?"
gasped Jay. "Oh, excuse me, but you lie.
You never recognised me in my 'bus."
"I knew without knowing I knew. I
219



<pb n="220"/>
THIS IS THE END 
remembered without remembering 
remembered. We haven't made a psy
discovery, Jay, we have done nothing to 
a book about. Only you remember so
that you have reminded me."
"I don't believe that can be true,"
Jay. "I know I wasn't there."
"Why can't you see the truth of it
asked Mr. Russell, sighing for so many W
wasted. "In that House by the Sea, 
was your Secret Friend ?"
"My Friend," said Jay, "is young
very full of youth. He is like a baby
knows life and yet finds it very amusing, 
very new. He is without the gift of rest,
then he does not need it, the world in w
he lives is not so tired and not so mud
as our world. In him my only belief and
only colour and my last dregs of roman
andcertainly my youth survive. We ne
bother about reserve, and we never 
being sentimental in my Secret World.
just live, and we are never tortured by
futility of knowledge."
"Well," said Mr. Russell, "I had a 
Friend in my House, and she was wond



<pb n="221"/>
THIS IS THE END
because she was so young that she knew
nothing. She never asked questions, but she
thought questions. She knew nothing, she
was waiting to grow up.   She had little
colour, only peace and promise. I knew she
would grow up, but I also knew she would
never grow old. I knew she would learn much,
but I also knew she would never become
complete and ask no more questions. That
voice of hers would always end on a question-
ing note. You see, I have found my Secret
Friend, grown-up, grown old enough to enjoy
and understand a new and more vital youth."
"Shall I find my Friend ?" asked Jay.
"Yes," said Mr. Russell in a very low
voice. "You can find him if you look. You
can find him, grown very old and ugly and
tired. There are different ways of growing
up, and your Secret Friend was rash in using
up too great a share of his sum of life in the
House by the Sea."
Then Jay was suddenly enormously happy,
and the veil of failure fell away from the
day and from her life. She held in her hand
incredible coincidences. The angle of the
forest, the upright trees upon the sloping



<pb n="222"/>
THIS IS THE END
earth, the bend of the sky, the round 
shapes of the clouds upon their ap
way, the agreement of the young leaves
with another, the unfailing pulse of
spring,-all these things seemed to 
chance, an unlikely and perfect consu
tion, that had been reached only by:
extraordinary cleverness of God. All
and all success were pressed into a h
breadth, and yet the target was never mi
"You shall go down to the House by 
Sea," said Jay.  "You shall go when
moon is next full over the sea that dro
our house. You shall come from the
along the rocky path, as you used to c
between the foxgloves; you shall play:
being a god, coming between the stars 
the sea. And I will play at being'a god
as I used to play at being a ghost, and I 
run to meet you from the west, and the h
grasses and the ferns shall whip my
and the thistles shall bow to me, and the:
shall be very calm and say no word, and t
shall be no ship in sight. And we will"'
down the steep path to the shore, and we,
stand where the sand is wet, and look upf



<pb n="223"/>
THIS IS THE END
where our drowned House used to be. And
there shall be no facts any more, only the
ghosts, and the dreams. Oh, surely it has
never happened before-this meeting of
Secret Friends-and surely no friend ever
loved her friend as I love you, and surely
there never was so little room for sin and
disappointment in any love as there is in
ours. Surely there are no tears in the world
any more, and no Brown Borough, and no
War. I don't care if I go hungry every day
till we meet, I don't care if I have nothing
but hated clothes to wear in my Secret World.
I don't care if there are six changes on the
journey to the sea, and at every change I miss
my connection. I don't care if the end lasts
only a minute, because the minute will last
for ever, there are no facts any more. Because
of you the little bothers of the world are
gone, and the big bothers never did exist,
because of you. Oh, I can say what I mean
at last, and if it's nonsense-I don't care,
because of you... .
Presently she said, "And now I wonder
if I am very proud or very much ashamed of
having spoken."
222



<pb n="224"/>
THIS IS THE END
"You said once," Mr. Russell re
her, " that life was just a bead.upon a s
Well, does it much matter whether one 
is the colour of pride or the colour of sha'
Does one successful bead more or less ma
my dear? I think it's all a succession 
explanations, more or less lucid, and
different and all confusing.  A string 
beads more or less beautiful, and all unvalu
We don't know that any of the explanati
are true, we don't know that any of the 
have any worth. We only know that 
are ours. ...
" I don't care if I trample my beads in
mud," said Jay. "Now let's go home
think." 
When she and Chloris got home
evening to Eighteen Mabel Place, Chlo
barked at a man who was waiting outside 
door. He was a young man in khaki, w
one star; he looked very white, and 
reading something from his pocket-book.
"Great Scott, Bill," said Jay. "I thoug
you were busy sapping in France. Were y
anywhere near Kew ?"
22A



<pb n="225"/>
THIS IS THE END
I do not know if you will remember the
name of young William Morgan. I think I
have only mentioned him once or twice.
"I got back on leave two hours ago," said
Mr. Morgan.    "I have been waiting here
thirty-two minutes.  I saw Kew every day
last week, and I was with him when he died,
three hours before I came away yesterday."
Jay was silent. She opened the door, and
in the sitting-room she placed-very carefully
-two chairs looking at each other across the
table.
"Jay," said William  Morgan, "I am
deadly afraid of doing -this badly. Kew and
I talked a good deal before it happened, and
there was a good deal he wanted me to tell
you. All the way back in the train and on
the boat I have been writing notes to remind
me what I had to say to you.  I hope you
don't mind.   I hope you don't think it
callous."
"No," said Jay.
"He was very anxious you should know
the truth about it, because he said he had
never lied to you. He was always sure that
if he were shot it would be in the back while
0 ce            n



<pb n="226"/>
THIS IS THE END           :
he was lacing his boots, or at some other 
romantic moment. And in that case he
he could lie to Anonyma and your co
vicariously through the War Office, whi
would write to them about Glory, and Du
and Thanks Due. But he wanted me to 
to you, and tell you how.it happened, and 
you that death was just an ordinary old thi
no more romantic than anything else, with
a capital letter, and that one died as one 
lived-in a little ordinary way-and that th
was no such thing as Glory between peo
who didn't lie to each other. I am telli
you all this from my notes. I should ne
have thought of any of it for myself, as 
know. I hope you don't mind."
" No," said Jay. She heard what he 
yet she was not listening.  Her mind 
listening to things heard a very long 
ago.  She heard herself and Kew in co
dential chorus, saying those laboriously sim
prayers that Anonyma used to teach th
She heard again the swishing that their f
used to make in the leaves of Kensi
Gardens.  Kew's was the louder swish]
right. She thought of him as an admir
«»«                :<'<l.r



<pb n="227"/>
THIS IS THE END
big brother of eight, with a round face and
blunt feet and very hard hands. She heard
the comfortable row of the nursery fire, and
the comfortable souad of autumn rain baffled
by the window,; she saw the early winter
breakfast by lampligh, and the red nursery
carpet that had an olong track worn away
round the table by die frquent game of
"Little Men Jumping /'She heard the voice
of Kew clamouring agiia the, voice of Nana
because he would not eat !ib bacon-fat. On
those days there was a hor  resurrection at
luncheon of the bacon-fatf ioaten at breakfast.
"As it happened,"       d Mr. Morgan,
no longer white, but veryi'd, "he wasn't killed
in an advance, or an     graod. He told
me to tell you, so I a  tdfig you. He was
killed by a sniper while hie was setting a trap
of his own invention to ctch the rats as they
came over the parapet. He was shot in the
chest very early yesterday morning, and he
lived about four hours. He was not in much
pain, he even laughed a little once or twice to
think he should have lived and died so con-
sistently. He told me that he had never seen
a moment's real romantic fighting; he had



<pb n="228"/>
THIS IS THE END 
never once felt patriotic or dramatic or dutiful, 
he said. He wandered a little, I think, because
he seemed worried about the rats that might
be caught in the trap he had set. He seemed
to mix up the rats and the Boches. He said
that these creatures didn't know they were
vermin, they just thought they were honest
average animals doing their bit, and then
suddenly killed by a malignant chaos. My
notes are very hurried.  I am afraid I am
repeating myself."
Jay remembered the mouse they once
caught, and kept in a bottle for a day, and
the palace they made for it out of stones and..
mud and moss, and the sun-bath of patted
mud they made by the door of the palace.
But the mouse, when it was installed, flashed
straight out of the front door, and jumped
the sun-bath, and knocked down a daisy, and
was never seen again. But Jay and Kew
used to believe that on moonlit nights it came
back to the palace, and brought its wife and
children, and was grateful to the palace
builders.
"A few days before he was killed," said
Mr. Morgan, "he told me that he had lied
..a



<pb n="229"/>
>..;il      TEL E END
so successfully ill his lif that' quite a lot of
people thought him a most admirable young
man. He said Anon'ya once brought him
into a book, and wheh he read that book he
saw how lying paid, ' long as one didn't
lie to absolutely everybody. He said if he
died Anonyma would .wite something very
nice upon his memorialbas about a pure
heart or everlasting lif, ,:ai he thought you
would smile a little at tha ti : e said that he
remembered going home i'th 3ou in a 'bus
and seeing on the window f,'t 'bus a text
that promised everlasting, life  on certain
conditions. He said the nrem   brance o
'that text tired him still. ,' H rilaid hehad had
too much of himself, he:  laiwn himself
too well, and when deatl c  e he wanted it
to be an honest little death  th no frills, and
after that an everlasting sleewith no dreams.
I am putting it all in 'he;4Rng order. I
shall make you despise n(:Y'!You talk so
well yourself."
Jay was remembering the ',Coos" they
used to have in the big armchair in the
nursery.  When    they found  that they
suddenly loved each other unbearably, they
2o0



<pb n="230"/>
THIS IS THE END
had a Coo, they tied themselves up in a little 
tangle together, and sang Coo in soft voices.
And then they felt relieved. Jay remembered
the last Coo. It happened when Kew's voice
was breaking ten years ago, and he found
that he could no longer coo except in a funny
falsetto. So, rather than become farcical, the
Coos ceased.
"I don't know quite why Kew wanted
me to tell you all this," said Mr. Morgan,
" except that he said you knew so much
about him that you might as well get as near
as possible to knowing everything.  He
never thought he would be killed, in fact
I gave him a lot of messages of my own
to give to my mother in case I went. But at
the last, when he knew he was dying, he was
desperately anxious you should know that he
did not die a " Stranger's death," as he said.
He thought any hint of drama about his
death would spoil your friendship. He said
you knew more than most people about
friends, and he thought that in this way you
-could find for him  a certain 'secret im-
mortality' which would make the soil of
France comfier for him to sleep in. And
230



<pb n="231"/>
then he said, 'If -I'm too poetic-like a
swan-don't report me too accurately." He
seemed to go to sleep for some time after
that, and every now and then he laughed very
faintly in his sleep. I had to leave him for a
bit, and when I came c1l he w  still asleep.
The only thing he said 4fter that was: 'This
is awfully exciting.' iHe - itdi that about ten
minutes before he died   I hope I'm   not
making it too painful for you, dear little Jay."
"No," said Jay. Quite irrelevantly, she
had found her Secret Friedt   She found a
little dark wood, burnt a4 btroken by fire,
in a grey light, and there wp, a wet ditch
that skirted the edge 9f it, She saw the
hopeless and regretful sky, there was neither
night nor morning in it, thre was neither
sun nor moon. These things she noticed,
but more than all she ssw her Secret Friend,
lying crouched upon his side close to the
ditch, with his arms about his face. She saw
the slow leaves fall upon him from the ruined
trees, she saw the damp air settle in beads
upon his clothes.  His feet were in the
undergrowth, and above them the dripping
net of the spider was lung. She had never
S$t



<pb n="232"/>
THIS IS THE END
seen; her Friend quite still before. All her
life her Secret Friend and her Secret Sea had
kept her soul awake with movement. But
her Friend was dead, and there was no more
sea. The very fine rain blew across her
Secret World, and blotted it out. The very
distant sound of guns-which was not so
much a sound as an indescribable vacuum of
sound-shattered the walls of her bubble
enchantment. ---
"Oh, duling Jay," said   Mr. William
Morgan, "I wish I could help you. I can't 
go away and leave you like this. I wish I
could help you."
She found she had her forehead on the 
table, and her hands were knotted in her lap.
And where once the Gate to the House had 
been, there was only London now. No more 
would the drum of the sea beat in her heart, 
there was nothing left but the throbbing of 
distant trams.                             :
"So it's all lies . . .  she said quietly. .
"There really is a thing called death after all. 
People die ... ."
"Jay, darling, don't," sobbed Mr. Morgan. 
"For God's sake marry me, and I'll comfort 
232                    ,



<pb n="233"/>
THIS IS THE END
you. I won't die-I swear I won't. And
after all, it's Spring. There's no real death
in the Spring. Kew can't have died."
"Oh, what's the use of these eternal
seasons ? " said Jay. "There is a thing called
death. And death has no romance and no
reason. The rats died, and Kew died, and
the secret world died, and there is nothing
left ... ."
.33



<pb n="234"/>
I
.i
I
i



<pb n="235"/>
IT was young David, lord of sheep and cattle,
Pursued his Fate, the April fields among,
Singing a song of solitary battle,
A loud mad song, for he was very young.
Vivid the air-a-nd something more than vivid,-
Tall clouds were in mh sAky-.ad something more,-
The light horizon of te spng was livid
With a steel smile tla'4shOwe4 the teeth of War.
It was young David mocked the Philistine.
It was young David laughic:eside the river.
There came his mother-  ,.nd a yours and mine-
With five smooth stoas, *d dropped them in his
quiver.            ' f
You never saw so gree-aad-gold a fairy.
You never saw such very April eyes.
She sang him sorrow's sog to Amke him wary,
She gave him five smoot snes to make him wise.
The first stone is love, and that shall fail you.
The second stone is -hte, and that shall fail you.
The third stone is'knowledge, and that shall fail
you.
The fourth stone i prayer, and that shall fail you.
The fifth stone shall not fail you.
235



<pb n="236"/>
THIS IS THE END 
For what is love, O lovers of my tribe ?
And what is love, O women of my day ?   .
Love is a farthing piece, a bloody bribe 
Pressed in the palm of God, and thrown away.
And what is hate, O fierce and unforgiving ?
And what shall hate achieve, when all is said?
A silly joke, that cannot reach the living,
A spitting in the faces of the dead.
And what is knowledge, O young men who tasted
The reddest fruit on that forbidden tree?
Knowledge is but a painful effort wasted,
A bitter drowning in a bitter sea.
And what is prayer, O waiters for the answer?
And what is prayer, O seekers of the cause ?
Prayer is the weary soul of Herod's dancer,
Dancing before blind kings without applause.
The fifth stone is a magic stone, my David,
Made up of fear and failure, lies and loss.
Its heart is lead, and on its face is graved
A crooked cross, my son, a crooked cross.
It has no dignity to lend it value;
No purity-alas-it bears a stain. 
You shall not give it gratitude, nor shall you
Recall it all your days except with pain.
, , 



<pb n="237"/>
THIS IS THE END
Oh, bless your blindness, glory in your groping!
Mock at your betters with an upward chin !
And, when the moment has gone by for hoping,
Sling your fifth stone, 0 son of mine, and win.
Grief do I give you-grief and dreadful laughter.
Sackcloth for banner, ashes in your wine.
Go forth, go forth, nor ask me what comes after.
The fifth stone shall not fail you, son of mine.
GO FORTHI, :0 FORTH, AND SLAY THE
r lT  IUSTINE 
' . Z..' ·



<pb n="238"/>
I 2
'V



<pb n="239"/>
THERE were a few very warm days and nights
in the  est ;last spring. It was at the time
of the fill* o.
There   e io few clouds in the sky that
when the sU^4mt down it found no canvas
on which ti't its picture. So it went
down unp:       , into a bank of grey heat
that hid th'e-*!    of the sea, and no one
thought it i'     watching except a man
coming alot)i*   the cliff from the north-
east. The i c     came up and filled the
quarry with jij and with confused and
blinded mi          The sea advanced in
armies of g     iooth waves, but under the
moon the      ;'went down, and the waves
went down, 'l 'there was less and less sound
in the air,: : ""'
One mam' watched the dwindling waves
troop into the cove near the quarry. There
was onll'ane pair of eyes in the whole world
0 M



<pb n="240"/>
THIS IS THE END
that tried that night to trace in the air the
shape of a drowned house. There was only
one shadow by the quarry for the moon to cast
upon the thyme. There was no voice but the
voice of the sea. No passing but the peaceful
passing of the lambs disturbed the thistles and
the foxgloves.
The sea rose like a wall across the night,
a wall that shut half of life away. The sky
fell like a curtain on the land, but there was
no piece to be played, so the curtain was
never raised.
/One man waited all the night through, like
Za child waiting for the fairies. The sea grew
calmer and calmer, the tide went down, and
the cove spread out its long sands like fingers
into the sea. There was a shadow on the
sands below the quarry, and it may have been
the shadow of a house. And perhaps when
the tide came up at dawn it devoured old
footprints upon the shore, the prints of feet
that will never come back. I think that when
the moon fled away into oblivion, it was not
only the moon that fled, but also a bubble
world, full of dead secrets.
How foolish to wait for the culmiation of



<pb n="241"/>
THIS IS THE END
a secret story! How foolish of a man to
wait all night for the redemption of an old
promise, for the resurrection of a forgotten
romance ! There are no secret stories, there
isno secret world, there are no secret friends.
The House by the Sea has been drowned,
and even its ghosts have forgotten it. After
all, there 's ,nothing to remember. The
gate to ther;-jse is barred, not by a lock
but by a latgj;i Reality and not adversity
has blown th,   iable away.
I remember tb   moment when Jay found
four-fifths of  : life proved false. I re-
member that 'i .  besieged the world with
tears; I remembr ithat she bruised her hands
against the iron gate. How foolish to bruise
one's hands against nothingness !
ANTI-CLIMAX
"It is "/ sighed Anonyma, "that our
little Jay ';"it last found Romance. Since
·first she ci 'to my arms-a toddling sceptic
of four-4lihave seen what she lacked, I have
prayed t  " I-who possessed it-might per-
241             R



<pb n="242"/>
THIS IS THE END
haps be inspired to give her the Clue ...
Yet to young Bill Morgan it was given to
show her the way . . . to unlock the door.
. . . Oh I Russ, we grow older and wiser
and are left behind. The young reap where
we have sown. ... Is this always to be the
end of our youth ? "
Mr. Russell laughed a little. "Yes," he
said. "This is the end." -
242



<pb n="243"/>
THa finest fruit God ever made
Hangs from the Tree of Heaven blue.
It hangs above the steel sea blade
That cuts the world's great globe in two.
The kmst eye that ever saw
Stares oof ~Heaven into mine,
Spins ouit l i eart, and seems to draw
My souY !astic very fine.
The gramict beacon ever fired
Stands up 04 Heaven's Hill to show
The.limt of the thing desired
Beyond.which man may never go.
At midnight when the night did dance
Along the hours that led to morning,
I sawra little boat advance
Towa i4ti great moon's beacon warning.
(The moa    God's Slave, who lights the torch,
Lest ^es should slip between the bars,
Anpja aground on Heav'n and scorch
To death upon a bank of stars.)
,    43



<pb n="244"/>
THIS IS THE END
The little boat, on leaning keel,
Sang up the mountains of the sea,
Bearing a man who hoped to steal
God's Slave from out eternity.
" My love, I see you through my tears.
No pity in your face I see.
I have sailed far across the years:
Stretch out, stretch out your arms to me.
"My love, I have an island seen,
So shadowed, God's most piercing star
Shall never see where we have been,
Shall never whisper where we are.
"There we will wander, you and I,
Down guilty and delightful ways,
While palm-trees plait their fingers high
Against your God's enormous gaze.
" For oh-the joy of two and two,
Your Paradise shall never see
The ecstasy of me and you,
The white delight of you and me.
"I know the penalty-the clutch
Of God's great rocks upon my keel.
Drowned in the ocean of Too Much-
So ends your thief-yet let me steal ...."
OAA



<pb n="245"/>
THIS IS THE END
The Slave of God she froze her face,
The Slave of God she paid no heed,
And thundering down high Heaven's space
Loud angels mocked the sailor's greed.
The diamond sun arose, and tossed
A billion gems across the sea.
"The Slave of God is lost, is lost,
Tie Slave of God is lost to me . .."
Hie grounded on the common beach,
He tird she little towns of men,
And   tla.emovad from his reach
The'iiWi' Heaven's passion then,
Anld g:ilm vulgar love and speech,
AndD    ! ;.in threescore years and ten.
THE END
Printed by R. & R CLARK, LIMITrD, Edinbu'rh.



