<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
Popular Books
By MRS. E. D. E. N. SOUTHWORTH
In Handsome Cloth Binding
Price   -   -   60 Cents per Volume
CAPITOLA'S PERIL
CRUEL AS THE GRAVE
"EM"
EM'S HUSBAND
FOR WHOSE SAKE
ISHMAEL
LILITH
THE BRIDE'S FATE
THE CHANGED BRIDES
THE HIDDEN HAND
THE UNLOVED WIFE
TRIED FOR HER LIFE
SELF-RAISED
WHY DID HE WED HER?
GLORIA
DAVID LINDSAY
THE BRIDE'S ORDEAL
HER LOVE OR HER LIFE
NEAREST AND DEAREST
LITTLE NEA'S ENGAGEMENT
THE LOST LADY OF LONE
THE STRUGGLE OF A SOUL
THE TRAIL OP THE SERPENT
A TORTURED-HEART
THE TEST OF LOVE
Por Sale by all Booksellers
or will be cent postpaid on receipt of price
A. L. BURT COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
52 Duane Street             New York
Copyright, 1879 and 1880
By ROBJRT BONNER
]eaewal granted to Mr. Charlotte Southworth  awreace
1907
"A.Tman      T
A^ errft~ui~with
BTREET & SMI.
+   LI ERAR A  V-
JUL   1 194S
RVw 0SsvCBlTXV



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
A Tortured Heart
Being Part Second of
"The Trail of the Serpent"
By MRS. E. D. E. N. SOUTHWORTH
Author of " Nearest and Dearest," "Little Nea's Engagement,"
"The Lost Lady of Lone," " The Struggle of a Soul,"
" Em," "Em's Husband," Etc.
A. L. BURT COMPANY
PUBLISHERS      ::  ::    NEW YORK



<pb n="3"/>
A TORTURED HEART
CHAPTER I
"FOLLOW THIS MAN"
"FOLLOW this man."
Lona Pond, the fair, fragile girl who lay back in a
mesmeric trance, heard the words and her fingers trem-
bled.
Old Nan Crook, the mesmerist, waited, with her eyes
fixed upon the girl It was her purpose to send the clair-
voyant in quest of the mortal remains of the late Earl of
Hawkewood and claim the reward promised for the dis-
covery.
She had taken from her pocket a soft, black curl of the
young earl's hair and pressed it to the forehead of the
entranced girl.
"Follow this man," repeated old Nan, in a low, impera-
tive tone.
"I do," breathed the girl.
"Do you see him ?"
"Yes, I see him."
"Where is he?"
"Stop-I see only his face. There is something white
before him which hides all but that. And that is dim and
cloudy. I do not know it."
"Ah! Ah! He is laid out and covered over. Watch!
Watch!" eagerly panted Old Nan.
"Don't! Don't! You hurt me!" cried the entranced
girl, quick to catch the agitation of the other.
Old Nan controlled herself by a strong effort of will,
and continued her experiments.
186556



<pb n="4"/>
4            A TORTURED HEART
"Watch carefully-he is laid out on a table, and cov-
ered over with a sheet. Watch who comes."
"No," said Lona, slowly; "he is not lying down-he is
sitting up, and something white before him; but all is
vague."
Old Nan pressed the lock of hair upon the girl's white
forehead and closed eyelids, muttering:
"Look steadily; see clearly."
"Yes; I know now. He is sitting in a barber's chair,
with a large white towel before him. Now he rises, and
the towel falls. And now I know him. He is Horace
Hawke, Earl of Hawkewood. All fades away," said the
girl in a fainting tone, as her chin dropped and her whole
form relapsed.
"Humph !" muttered Old Nan. "In the barber's chair,
in course. I might a-knowed as the lock of hair would a-
tuk him just where it left him."
She let her victim rest for a few minutes and then made
a few more passes over her head and shoulders, and, when
the form was rigid again she said once more:
"Follow this man"
"I see him," breathed the entranced girl.
"Where is he?"
"Stop-it is confused. Oh, I see now. He is in a beau-
tiful garden, or lawn, or park. There are a great multi-
tude of people in their Sunday clothes; but I can't make
any of them out. And there are tents, and tables, and
musicians: but they are all mixed up. And now all is con-
fusion again, and they are gone."
A few more vigorous passes, with the steady formula:
"Follow this man," and she resumed her revelations.
"I see him again, in a room full of gayly dressed ladies
and gentlemen; but I cannot make any of them out. And
now they are all gone," concluded the entranced girl, with
a deep sigh.
"Follow this man."
"I do. I see him. He is in a half dark, handsome room,
where the walls are full of books from floor to ceiling.
There is another man with him. They seem to be talking
together."
"What are they saying?"



<pb n="5"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      5
"I cannot hear a word or sound. Yet they seem to be
talking. And now the light goes out, and all is dark."
"Follow this man."
"I follow him. I find him in a handsome bedroom:
rich crimson hangings fringed with gold are around the
bedstead and before the windows."
"Is he alone?"
"No; there are two others with him."
"Who are those two others?"
"I don't know. I can't see them distinctly. I can never
see any one distinctly except him-the earl."
"Ah! to be sure. You have only got a lock of the earl's
catechism:
"What is the earl doing?"
"Nothing. The two other people are doing something
to him."
"Eh !" exclaimed Nan, in a startling tone. 'What are
they doing to him?  Are they killing him?"
"Don't! Oh, don't! You hurt me! No, they are not
injuring him in any way, for the earl is sitting before his
dressing table laughing, while they are standing each side
of him, with their hands about his head, like they were
bandaging or muffling it. And the earl is laughing all
the time. I cannot hear him laughing, but I can see him."
'Look! look! See who the two other persons are and
what they are doing," eagerly commanded Old Nan.
"I cannot. They are like dense, thick, black shadows of
people. I can see they are men, by the shadows having
antaloons instead of gowns, and by their being so tall and
big. Otherwise, I could not even see that much."
"Nor what they are doing to the earl?"
"No, no. And now the earl gets up and goes out. The
shadows follow him to the door. The shorter of the two
goes out with the earl. The other shadow remains in the
room."
"One of the people goes out with the earl, you say?
Does the earl leave his room ?"
"Yes, he goes out, and the shorter of the shapes follows
him. The room sinks into darkness. All is gone."
"Follow this man."
"I follow him. I see him on the railway. It is day-
light. There are others with him. But I see their shapes



<pb n="6"/>
6            A TORTURED HEART
only vaguely. I do not know them. I see the earl plainly.
I know him."
"Stop. You see the earl plainly. On a railway train?
By daylight?" interrupted Old Nan, in bewilderment.
"Yes; he is roughly dressed, but I know him. And now
he is gone, and the train is gone."
"Follow this man."
"I follow him. There is a great crowd of shipping.
I see him on the deck of a great ship. There is great
noise and confusion. I cannot hear the racket, but I see
it. And I see the earl quite plainly. He is standing on
the deck. He is gazing out at sea. His face is full of
light and life."
"Is it the earl? Are you sure?"
"Yes, though he is dressed coarsely and has a long black
beard."
"Then it is not the earl, for the earl has no beard, and
could not have grown one in a few hours," said Old Nan,
with a bewildered look.
"It is the earl, though he does not look like himself,"
persisted the entranced girl.
"How do you know it is the earl, if he does not look
like himself?" inquired Old Nan.
"By something surer than sight or hearing," answered
the girl.
"And what is that?"
"I cannot tell."
"Why can you not tell?"
"Because I do not know what it is. And now the ship
has gone, and all is black again.
"Follow this man."
"I do follow him. I see him again. He has no long
black beard now, but a stubble growth upon his chin, and
he still wears common clothes."
"Where is he now?"
"I cannot see yet-out of doors somewhere-stay! Now
I begin to see! It is in a hilly country. There are huts
and tents, and holes like wells, with windlasses above them.
And there are a great many rough-looking men; some at
work in the windlasses; some washing something in pans
on the bank of a stream of water; some are squatting on
the ground; some are lying down at full length; a good



<pb n="7"/>
A TORTURED HEART 
many are smoking pipes; but I cannot see any of them very
distinctly; they are like moving shadows, all but the earl,
whom I see very plainly."
"What is he doing?"
"Walking about smoking a pipe and talking to one or
another of the men."
"Go on," said Old Nan.
"I cannot. Darkness has swallowed up the scene."
"Follow this man."
"I cannot. It is dark. I cannot see him," replied the
entranced girl, whose face grew troubled in expression.
Old Nan made some heavy passes over the victim's
head, neck and shoulders; and when the latter had be-
come rigid again, she repeated her formula:
"Follow this man."
"I cannot   Oh, I cannot! It is so dark."
Old Nan took the lock of hair and pressed it on the
forehead and on the closed eyes of the girl and reiterated
her words:
"Follow this man."
"Oh, I cannot! It is all dark," repeated Lona, in a
tone of distress.
"Hear and obey, then: Return to the chamber of the
earl and tell me what you see there."
"I cannot go anywhere, I cannot see anything   I suf-
fer! Oh, I suffer! I faint! I die!" breathed the tor-
tured girl, in a voice that grew fainter with every syllable,
and finally sank into silence.
Nor could all the efforts of Old Nan bring her to speak
again.
"I hev overdid it this go, I'm afeared!" muttered the
crone, as she began to reverse the passes over the girl's per-
son.
After a while Lona Pond opened her eyes; but she
seemed to be thoroughly prostrated in strength.
"n^w is it with you, lass?" inquired the crone.
But the exhausted creature could only look at the ques-
tioner with her dim eyes and sigh.
Old Nan went to her rude corner cupboard and poured
out a glass of brandy and brought it to the girl, saying
heartily:



<pb n="8"/>
8            A TORTURED HEART
"Comel Drink this, good wench, and yer'll feel bet-
ter."
Lona mechanically took the glass and swallowed a
mouthful of the brandy, whose fiery strength half strangled
her and threw her into a hard fit of coughing.
But it effectually aroused her.
"Oh oh oh! give me a sup of milk, Mrs. Crook. My
throat is on firel" she exclaimed, in the midst of her
strangling cough.
Old Nan brought the desired emollient, and Lona drank
it slowly.
"Now, then, you feel better," said the crone, as she
took the empty cup from the girl. "Now do you know
what you have been doing?"
"I have been in a trance, I s'pose. I remember you
were going to put me in one," replied the girl.
Old Nan went and put away the empty cup, and re-
turned and seated herself beside Lona Pond, inquiring:
"Do you remember where you went and what you did
in that trance?"
"No; I wish I did. But I suppose I went to look after
Ham. You said you would send me to him."
"Yes, dearie, and so I did," replied Mrs. Crook, with
a confidential nod.
"And did I go? And did I see him? And was he
alive and well? Oh, tell me what I saw  Oh, how I wish
I could remember !"
"Yer must trust in me, my wench. I can tell you every-
thing yer saw," said Old Nan, who never hesitated to tell
a falsehood when it suited her convenience to do so.
"Tell me now, Mrs. Crook I Tell me now!"
"Well, lass, yer found yer sweetheart alive and well, and
getting rich hand over fist!"
"Ohl Oh! Where was he, then?"
"In the gold country, at t'other end of the world, stand-
ing over a shaft full of pure gold, and a winding it up
with a windlass by the bucketful, like water out'n a well!
Oh, yer'll be rich as rich, yer will, and ride in yer car-
riage and four, and have diments to wear, and liverymen
servants to wait on her!" chuckled Old Nan.
"Oh   Oh 1 Oh    What a wonderful country that must
be where the gold is winded up in bucketsful like water



<pb n="9"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     9
outen a well  What a pity all the poor people can't get at
it!" cried Lona, beside herself with wonder and admira-
tion.
"A hundred thousand pities!" exclaimed Old Nan.
Suddenly Lona's face clouded over.
"I wonder does Ham still think of me, when he is grow-
ing so rich? Why, he'll be richer than the Earl of Hawke-
wood himself !"
"A hundred times richer!"
"And richer than the Duke of Grand Manors 1"
"A hundred times !"
"And as rich as the royal family, maybe 
"A great deal richer !"
"Then I think he ought to give the queen some of the
gold to help out with the wedding portions of the prin-
cesses, you know."
"Yes, and of course a l'yal subject like Ham Gow would
do that much for the r'yal family," said Old Nan, with
a nod.
"But, oh! I was thinking, will Ham care for me now
he is growing so rich?" inquired Lona Pond, with a sigh.
"Care for you I Hear the wench  Why, don't yer see
for yerself, how much he cared for yer, when yer watched
him at his gold hauling?"
"You forget that I never remember anything in my
trances."
"Ah, poor lass! that is true! Wot a pity it is! Well,
then I'll tell yer wot yer reported to me, as yer saw in
yer clare-woy-ant state. Yer saw yer sweetheart stop
after hauling up each bucket full of pure yellow gold and
pour the gold out on the side of a heap that was growng
as big as a haystack, and set down his empty bucket and
take yer doggy type out'n his bosom and kiss it twenty
times or more and make signs to it, by pointing to the great
stack of gold, as much as to say all that gold was for you,
and then kiss yer doggy type twenty times more and put
it in his bosom, and let down his empty bucket again into
the shaft for another bucketful of gold."
"Dear, dear Ham. But had he a partner to divide with?
I think I have heard the miners are obliged to have part-
ners. Did I see one? Or how did he get his bucket filled



<pb n="10"/>
10           A TORTURED HEART
at the bottom of the shaft? Did I see that?" eagerly de-
manded Lona.
"Oh, yes! But he didn't have to divide with no partner.
He had a native, who didn't care about gold, but would
work all day long for a gill of rum."
"Oh! But wasn't that wrong, Mrs. Crook?"
"It would be very wrong here in England, but it would
be all right at the other end of the world."
"Would it?"
"In course it would, my gel! It makes all the differ-
ence being out there."
"I suppose it does. Mrs. Crook?"
"What, honey?"
"When I saw Ham, did I see him as he was some time
ago, or as he is now?"
"As he is now-to-day, this hour, this minute. You
may depend that he is standing there, just as yer saw him
an hour ago, winding up buckets full of gold, and he
won't knock off work until it is dark."
"Right now! To think I should know what he is doing
at this selfsame, said, identical minute !" exclaimed Lona,
in a glow of wonder and delight.
"Yes, it is a great power."
"It is better than letters, or telegrams, either !"
"A heap better, wench."
"And, Mrs. Crook, whenever I want to hear from Ham
I will come here and let you put me in a trance."
"So do, my lass."
"I feel as if I wasn't parted from Ham, now that I
can go into a trance and look on him whenever I like!
But, oh, if I could only remember when I come out of
them! If I could only remember, instead of having to be
told by you! Mrs. Crook?"
"Well, lass."
"Does going into a trance do me any harm?"
"Bless the gel! No   What made yer ask?"
"Because I feel so weak when I come out of them. that
is al."
"Oh, that is nothing. Yer only tired as if yer'd been
irt a long walk. And it is a long way to Australia "
idded Old Nan, with an effort at pleasantry.
"o 'tis. Well, now, Mrs. Crook, I must be going. The



<pb n="11"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      11
housekeeper at Hawke Hall gave me a holiday this after-
noon, but she bade me be at home before dark. So I must
be off. But the very next holiday I can get I mean to come
here again to be put in a trance and sent to see Ham."
"So do, my wench. And one thing I may tell you for
yer comfort. I hev heerd as clare-woy-ants, after going
into many trances, come to a state as makes 'em able to re-
member all they hev seen or heerd in their trances."
"Oh, I wish I could come into such a state 1 But, Mrs.
Crook, are you sure it is not wrong?"
"Wrong? Bless the wench, no! Why should it be
wrong?"
"I didn't know. It was so nice, I was afraid it was
wrong. Well, good-by, I am going now," concluded Lona.
And she went.
As soon as she was left alone, Old Nan Crook sank down
into her armchair and fell into thought.
"Very strange-very strange," she muttered to herself.
"Has this experiment been a failure, like the other was,
or is there a secret hidden under all this show?
"I never knowed a clare-woy-ant to go off on a false
scent in my life before, and it would be odd if this gel was
the very fust one to do it.
"I hev knowed hounds to go off on a false scent afore
now; and policemen and detectives is most in general sure
to go off on false scents; but I never knowed a clare-woy-
ant to do it, never!
"Now, what's the secret of this gel's disclosures? Let
me remember how it was in the fust instance. W'en I
fust put her into a trance, I sent her off in search of Mrs.
Irvine's body. And she followed of it-not to the bottom
of the Demondike, or out with the tide, or on to some lone-
some beach; no, indeed. But into a first-class carriage on
the express train, and up to a great city where it prospered
finely, and
"'Dwelt in marble halls,'
and where it lived on the fat of the land, and
"'Walked in silk attire.'
"That didn't look much like being drowned in Demon-
dike and cast up by the waves on some lonesome part of



<pb n="12"/>
12           A TORTURED HEART
the coast! Not a bit! It looked like a scheme, a decep-
tion, a conspiracy, or sunmmat of that sort. Ah, if I could
only find out the truth about that my fortune would be
made! But my mejum failed me just there! Traced her
or somebody to some palatial mansion and there lost her!
And this palatial mansion might be in London, or Paris,
or Rome, or New York, for aught I know.
"And now this last venter hasn't been a bit more suc-
cessful, as I see! I put my mejum into a mesmeric sleep
and send her to look for a certain dead corpse, and she
takes arter a living man and follows him to the anter-
podys!
"Now, wot is the meaning of it all, anyhow? 'Cording
to the clare-woy-ant, nither Mrs. Irvine nor the late Lord
Hawkewood is dead at all, but both are living-she living
in a palace and dressing in silks and satings every day,
and he at t'other end of the world among the gold dig-
gers! This is the case 'cording to the clare-woy-ant, and
I never knowed a clare-woy-ant to go off on a false scent
yet, though hounds sometimes do, and detectives always
sure to do! Yet the clare-woy-ant must be off trail this
time. It ain't possible either one of them two can be liv-
ing, let alone both of 'em.
"I know wot I'll do! I'll put that gel in a trance and
send her off arter Ham Gow! He may throw some light
on the subject I Besides, I want to hear about him, poor
lad! I should have sent her arter him to-day, only I was
so anxious to find the earl's body and get the reward that I
sent her arter that first (and much I got for my pains),
and when she had gone through that search she was too
weak to be put into another trance.
"Heigh-ho! It's a rum world 1"
With this philosophical remark, Old Nan arose and made
up the fire in the fireplace, and filled her kettle with water
and hung it over the blaze, preparatory to getting her
evening meaL
CHAPTER II
A TERRIBLE NIGHT AND DAY
ON the morning succeeding the evening when Isoline
Irvine had been frightened nearly out of her senses by a



<pb n="13"/>
A TORTURED HEART                       15
real or supposed apparition in the park of Belle Isle, strict
inquiries were made among the servants as to whether any
of them had been walking in the grounds on that occasion,
and it was very satisfactorily ascertained that they were
not; on the contrary, that they were all in the servants'
hall, engaged in a round game of cards.
Miss Irvine was well laughed at for her supposed hallu-
cination on the subject; but she could not be laughed out
of her conviction that she had seen her mother, as she had
stated, then and there.
The matter passed out of discussion, and might never
have been recalled but for an incident that occurred a few
days later.
The lessons for the day were over, and Isoline had come
into the library to find a book and to enjoy its quietness.
The library at Belle Isle was a lofty room, running from
east to west, along the north wall of the castle, which was
here pierced by four tall windows. In the rear or west
end of the room was a deep bay window, furnished with
ottomans and hung with simple green shades. This win-
dow overlooked the thickly wooded plantation behind the
castle.
Opposite the bay window, and at the eastern extremity
of the room, hung a broad and lofty mirror, which, when
these window shades were raised, reflected the scene from
the rear, with all its beauty of sunlit clouds and variegated
foliage prolonging an indefinite vista.
It is necessary to give this description of the bay win'
dow and its opposite reflecting mirror, in order to explain
what afterward happened.
When Isoline Irvine came into the library, the room was
nearly dark, for all the green shades were down.
She left those at the tall north windows just as she found
them, but she drew up those of the bay window, into which
the 'low descending sun" now poured a flood of burning
heat and dazzling light.
She turned away from the glare, selected a book and
took it to the front of the room, and ensconsed herself in an
easy-chair, near the great mirror, where, for the first time
since entering the library, she perceived that she was not
alone.
Her eldest pupil, Lady Victoria Belle Isle, was seated on



<pb n="14"/>
14           A TORTURED HEART
a hassock on the carpet, with a volume of Waverly Novels
on her lap, and eyes and mind absorbed in the witchery
of "Ivanhoe."
"Do not let me disturb you, dearest," said Isoline, as
she opened her book, which was an old-fashioned, charm-
ing poem, "Thompson's Seasons."
Lady Victoria did not answer-did not even hear. She
was leagues away in space, centuries away in time. She
was a spectator at that fearful ordeal by tournament be-
tween Ivanhoe and the Templar, upon the issue of which
the fate of the Jewess hung.
No other word was spoken between the girls. Both
went on reading, while the afternoon sun sank lower and
lower, withdrawing its glancing gleams from the room
like golden arrows into their quiver.
Then Isoline looked up from her book upon the face of
the mirror, where the reflected beauty of the "afterglow"
upon clouds and foliage hung like a peerless painting, such
as had never been created by human hands.
"Oh, my heart! my heart!-Victoria! Look! lookI"
she gasped, in suffocating and scarcely articulate tones, as
she clutched the young lady's shoulder.
Lady Victoria, violently dragged from the twelfth to the
nineteenth century, raised her dark eyes in questioning
amazement.
She was facing the mirror, in which she now saw re-
flected a picture that at once fixed her gaze.
It was the beautiful, pale face of a woman, crowned
with
Aureole of ebon locks,
and looking out from the green shades of the foliage.
With an exclamation of astonishment, Lady Victoria
dropped her book and ran down the length of the library
toward the bay window.
But when she reached it the face was gone.
She threw up the sash and stepped out into the planta-
tion and gazed around, but no sign of a human being was
to be seen or heard.
She returned into the library and walked back to the
spot where she had left Isoline, and where she now found



<pb n="15"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      15
the girl kneeling on the carpet, with her head bowed upon
the cushioned seat of an armchair.
"I could not find anyone outside the window, Isoline,"
said the young lady, standing over her friend.
"But you saw it ! You saw it as well as I did !" breathed
the bowed girl, in an expiring voice.
"Yes, but I could not find anyone outside."
"It is not likely that you should find anyone there; but
you saw it!"
"I saw a face at the window reflected in the mirror.
Whose was it, Isoline?"
"Did you recognize that face?"
"I thought I did; but I cannot be certain. Whose was
it, Isoline?"
"Not that of any mortal being! It was the face of my
lost mother, Lady Victoria 1
"Oh, Isoline!"
"It was my dead mother's living face! Oh! and this
is the second time I have seen it!  Oh! why should I
shrink from my mother's face? Yet flesh and blood can-
not bear such sights, and I know, if I continue to see it,
I shall die 1 I shall die !" shuddered the girl, with blood-
less lips.
"Oh   Isoline, love, it could not have been what you
think. That is impossible, you know! It was some face
that resembled your mother's. Some stranger must be on
the island, and this mystery must be looked into and cleared
up. The whole island must be carefully searched for the
impostor who is practicing on your fears," said Lady Vic-
toria, in a soothing tone, as she arose and touched the bell.
"Close the shutters and light the lamps," she said to
the man who entered in obedience to the summons.
It was now near the end of the short autumn twilight,
and the two girls left the library.
"Do not speak of this affair, please, Victoria. I could
not bear the discussion of the subject this evening," pleaded
Isoline, still trembling excessively.
"I will not since you wish me to be silent; but the
grounds ought to be searched for the intruder," remon-
strated the young lady.
"It would be useless. No one would be found. Oh,



<pb n="16"/>
16           A TORTURED HEART
what does it all mean? What does it mean?" breathed
Isoline.
Lady Victoria silently drew her friend's arm within her
own and led into the warmed and lighted drawing-room,
where all the cheerful family circle were assembled.
And happily, at that moment, the announcement of din-
ner drew attention away from Isoline and prevented the
discovery of her pallor and tremor.
Mr. Ball, of Bowling Green, was expected and waited
for.
"He is punctual to a minute. Never thirty seconds too
soon or too late. He was invited for eight o'clock, and it
is eight now. I cannot think what is the matter," said
the duke testily, as they stood around the fire.
A that moment the hall footman threw open the door
and announced:
"Mr. Ball!"
And the round little man appeared to answer for him-
self.
"Fifty seconds too late," said the host, as he advanced
with a smile to welcome the guest.
"He should have been a military martinet, duchess. He
has missed his vocation," remarked the squire, as, after
greeting his host, he went on to pay his respects to his
hostess.
"Well, if I am not more punctual at the meet to-morrow
let me hear of it, will you?" requested the duke, with a
laugh.
"We certainly will do so," rejoined Mr. Ball.
The squire of Bowling Green was Master of the Hounds,
and there was to be a grand meet near his place the n.xt
morning.
The old squire shook hands with the young ladies, and
dinner being announced, he gave his arm to the duchess
to take her to the dining-room.
The visit of the old squire to Belle Isle was, in fact,
made for the sole purpose of spending the evening with
the duke and talking over some minor matters connected
with the meet of the next morning.
So, after dinner was over, and the ladies had retired
from the table, the two gentlemen sat long over their



<pb n="17"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     17
claret, not drinking much, but talking a great deal on the
subject of hounds, covers and quarries.
They at length joined the ladies in the drawing-room
over their tea, but, after partaking of it, excused them-
selves and withdrew to the smoking room, where they re-
sumed the subject so near to their hearts.
"Oh, how I wish the duke would give up fox hunting!"
sighed the duchess to her eldest daughter, when the gen-
tlemen had again left them.
"But he never will, mamma. So it is of no use to wish,"
replied Lady Hawkewood.
"Then if he would only ride a safe horse; but I gather
from his talk that he is going to mount Malignant. It is
madness !"
Lady Hawkewood turned a shade paler.
"Can papa really be in earnest in what he says?" she
inquired.
"Yes. He declares he will ride Malignant to-morrow.
The brute has already killed two men, and the duke says
he means to break his vicious spirit."
"'Whom the gods wish to destroy,' etc.," muttered Lady
Hawkewood to herself.
"The duke has been a famous horse breaker from his
youth up. If any man can tame Malignant, he can. I
really do not think you need have any fears for him,
madam," said the young Marquis of Belle Isle.
The duchess sighed. She also had the greatest confi-
dence in her husband's power, yet there was the shadow
of a coming calamity on her spirit that she could not
dispel.
It was quite late when the gentlemen returned to the
drawing-room, whither Mr. Ball only came to say good-
night.
After the old squire had gone the duchess spoke of the
coming meet of the hounds, and endeavored to dissuade
the duke from his purpose of riding the vicious horse.
But he laughed lightly at all her fears, as he replied:
'I suppose there must be something of the savage re-
maining in me which neither civilization nor Christianity
hs been able to conquer, for certainly I take more delight
in taming a bad tempered beast than in any other enter-
tainment that can offer itself. Don't be uneasy, Eleanora



<pb n="18"/>
18           A TORTURED HEART
There will be no danger to me. And now, as I shall be
off to the meet to-morrow before you are awake, I will bid
you good-night."
And the duke stooped and kissed her-an unusual dem-
onstration on his part-and then took up his bedroom can-
dle, and with a general "good-night" for the rest of the
family circle, he left the drawing-room.
The duchess knew that further remonstrance would be
quite vain; but she sighed as she followed his example,
and went up to her chamber.
This broke up the family circle, every member of which
now retired.
The next morning broke very propitiously for the hunt.
The duchess and her pleasant family party assembled
at the usual hour around the social breakfast table.
Neither the duke nor the young marquis were present.
They had both left the castle some hours before for the
meet at Bowling Green.
After the usual greeting the duchess turned to the foot-
man in attendance and directed him to summon the head
groom.
When this last-named functionary appeared at the door
of the breakfast parlor the duchess inquired:
"What horse did your master ride to the meet?"
"The white mare, Rose, your grace," replied the groom,
humbly.
"Ah ! Then, of course, he left Malignant in the stables.
I am glad of it," breathed the duchess, with a sigh of re-
lief.
"If your grace pleases--"
"Well, what do you wish to say?"
"Malignant was led to the meet by Suter, the under-
groom. My master will mount him for the start."
"Oh! That will do, Bentley. You may go."
The man made a very humble obeisance and withdrew
from the room.
The duchess sighed and left her breakfast almost un-
tasted.
But soon an event occurred that put danger out of her
mind for a season.
A servant entered with a telegram on a silver waiter,
which he laid on the table before his mistress.



<pb n="19"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     19
"From Northumberland. News from Squire Humber,
I presume. How did this come?" inquired her grace, as
she broke the seal.
"An office boy brought it over from Hawkeville in the
ferrvboat, your grace."
The duchess glanced over the dispatch and then read it
aloud to her daughters:
"HUMBER HOLD, October 25, 18-.
"Mr. Humber died here at one o'clock A. M. to-day. I
shall remain here until after the funeral, the time of which
is not yet fixed. I will write by the first mail.
" HAWKEWOOD."
"So he is gone at length, poor old gentleman," said Lady
Hawkewood.
"Is the messenger waiting?" inquired the duchesa.
"Yes, your grace."
"Then bring me writing materials from the library."
When the servant had obeyed this order, the duchess
wrote a hasty acknowledgment of the telegram, as fol-
lows:
"CASTLE BELLE ISLE, October 25, 18-.
"We have just received your message announcing the
sorrowful intelligence of Mr. Humber's decease. The duke
is absent, but shall be immediately summoned. We all
offer our sincere sympathy and await your letter.
"ELEANOR BELLE IsLE."
The duchess sent this answer by the same boy who
brought the dispatch.
Then she gave orders that a mounted groom should
ride full speed to Bowling Green to carry the news to
the duke-news that would certainly recall him imme-
diately to the castle.
"And, oh! may Heaven grant that the messenger may
find him before the start!" fervently prayed the duchess.
"It may be the means of saving his life, by preventing him
from mounting Malignant !" she added.
"It is an ill wind that blows nobody good," and "self-
preservation is the first law of nature," so it is to be ques-



<pb n="20"/>
20           A TORTURED HEART
tioned whether her grace, the Duchess of Grand Manors,
was really very sorry for the death of the old squire, which
created an imperative necessity for the duke's immediate
return from what she considered his most perilous expedi-
tion.
Her only anxiety now was that her messenger should
find his grace at the meet and before the start.
She had every reason to believe that such would be the
case, since it oftener happened than not that the quarry
was not uncovered until high noon.
Her grace waited in extreme anxiety until about three
o'clock in the afternoon, when Bentley, the groom, returned
alone.
The duchess had issued orders that if the man should
come back without his master he should be sent to lier
presence immediately.
Consequently the groom promptly presented himself to
the duchess.
"Well, you found his grace?" said the lady.
"No, madam, if you please-his grace had gone. The
fox had burst cover as early as ten o'clock, and had taken
a northwesterly course toward the Hawkewood Hall fields,
and the whole hunt had passed out of reach is that direc-
tion. I left your note to his grace with the butler at
Bowling Green, to give his grace when the gentlemen all
return there to dinner, and then I came back here for fur-
ther orders, madam."
"Quite right; but I have no further orders to give just
yet. You may go."
The groom bowed deferentially and withdrew.
The duchess walked up and down the floor, wringing
her hands and muttering:
"It is a fatality  Why should the start have been made
two hours earlier than usual ?"
"Mamma! Mamma! You will make yourself ill! Why
should you torture yourself by unnecessary anticipations
of evil?" inquired Lady Hawkewood, who was seated at,
her embroidery frame near one of the windows.
"Because I cannot help it, Volante. My soul is shad-
owed and oppressed by a foreboding of calamity that I
cannot shake off," replied the agitated wife, without slt p
ping in her restless walk.



<pb n="21"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     21
"But this is very morbid, dear mamma. Your own
reason should teach you that it is. You are afraid of Ma-
lignant. But papa is no boy to permit himself to be
thrown by a vicious horse. Papa's horsemanship is unsur-
passed in England. No horse has ever yet been able to
resist him successfully."
"That is true. Yet there is a homely proverb concern-
ing the pitcher that goes too often to the spring. Your
papa is not so strong as he was in earlier life. What dis-
turbance is that outside in the courtyard?" suddenly ex-
claimed the duchess, breaking off and turning pale.
"Oh, dear mamma, it is nothing to alarm you. I sup-
pose papa has had your message and has come back. I
will see," said Lady Hawkewood, and she left the room
for the purpose, while the duchess sank down on the sofa
and waited.
As Lady Hawkewood hastened toward the head of the
grand staircase she heard hasty, irregular footsteps as-
cending them, and the next instant was stopped by her
young brother, the Marquis of Belle Isle, pallid, staring,
trembling, like one distraught by woe.
"For Heaven's sake, Belle Isle, what is the matter with
you ? Where is papa?" demanded the countess, in sudden
alarm.
"That vicious brute-  Where is mamma? Go to her.
Keep her in her room, if possible  Do not let her come
out yet a while. I have sent for Ellis!" exclaimed the
young marquis, with incoherent snatches of words.
'Papa!-that horse!-has    an   accident  happened?
Speak, for Heaven's sake 1" cried the countess, in a breath-
less agony of suspense.
"Do not ask me! Go to mamma ! Keep her quiet until
Ellis and Dr. Vincent get here."
"But I cannot! I cannot until I know-       Has an
accident happened?" panted the countess.
'Yes yes I Now go to mamma I" cried the young man,
trying to break from her grasp.
"A-a-fatal accident?" she gasped, turning gray pale
even to the lips, and tightening her hold upon him.
"Oh! There she is now! There is mamma!-mam-
ma l-dearest mammal" cried the young man, in a voice



<pb n="22"/>
22           A TORTURED HEART
of anguish, as he flew to support the tottering form of the
duchess, who, livid, rigid, agonized, stood before them.
"The duke-the duke-" she muttered hoarsely, but
could say no more.
"The duke has been thrown from his horse and killed !"
exclaimed the voice of a frantic, foolish, hysterical house-
maid who was hurrying up the stairs upon some domestic
errand.
"The lunatic !" indignantly exclaimed the young son.
'Mamma! Mamma!" he cried, bending tenderly toward
the hapless lady whose head nestled on his shoulder.
'Mamma     Dearest mamma !"
But the heavy form of the duchess slipped from his em-
brace upon the floor, at his feet.
Her son and daughter stooped instantly to raise her.
But the Duchess of Grand Manors was dead I
CHAPTER III
A DAY OF DOOM
THERE was no mistaking death in a case like this. In
the ghastly hue, in the glazed and fixed eyes, and in the
fallen chin, the agonized son and daughter saw the death
of their mother!
Stupefied with sudden sorrow, they tenderly lifted the
body, bore it into the adjoining room, laid it on a couch,
and knelt beside it, mutely using all those simple means of
restoration that first occur to the mind under such cir-
cumstances, yet feeling all the while how vain such efforts
must be.
In the midst of their despairing endeavors, Dr. Ellis
hurriedly, yet quietly, entered the room.
With a silent, anxious greeting, the brother and sister
arose from their knees and made way for the physician.
With a mute gesture of acknowledgment the doctor knelt
over his patient-his patient no longer.
Her son and daughter watched him in an agony of
suspense that had scarcely hope enough in it to keep them
on the rack.
"It is as I feared," spoke the doctor, after a shor' but
effectual examination.



<pb n="23"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      2S
"She is-our mother is-   " began the son, in a voice
faint and breaking down with anguish.
"Gone-she is gone. I have known for years past that
she has had heart disease, and that any sudden shock-
Look to your sister, my lord!" cried the doctor, shortly
breaking off from his explanation; for the young countess,
with a wail of anguish, had rushed out of the room.
The young gentleman hastened out. He passed the
Vicar of Hawkeville, Dr. Vincent, who was coming in.
"This is terrible 1" exclaimed the physician, who, in a
few words, gave the clergyman an account of the double
tragedy which had so suddenly overwhelmed the happy
but fated household.
"Never in my whole life's experience has calamity so
swiftly, and with such destroying malice, fallen upon a
good family. The father brought home a corpse from the
hunting field; the mother dropping dead under the shock."
"How did the accident happen?" inquired Dr. Vincent,
in a voice scarcely above his breath.
"The duke rode Malignant, the wild Irish horse that no
one has yet succeeded in mastering. But the duke, you
know, has been a famous horse breaker in his time."
"Yes," said the clergyman; "but I should judge that his
grace has not been so strong within the last two or three
years as formerly."
"No, no, certainly he has not; and it is to that circum-
stance we must attribute the tragic ending of his ride
to-day," assented the physician.
"But how, exactly, did the catastrophe occur?" again in-
quired the parson.
"As nearly as I can gather from the confused accounts,
it happened in this manner: The duke had completely con-
quered the wild beast and had ridden him successfully all
day. They killed the fox about five o'clock near the head
of Demondike, and the hunters were returning leisurely
to Bowling Green, where the company were engaged to
dine, when, as they neared the old Ruined Tower, the
duke's horse, Malignant, suddenly took fright at the ap-
parition of Old Nan Crook, who stood in the path like an-
other Witch of Endor, with her blazing red hood and blue
cloak.,,



<pb n="24"/>
24           A TORTURED HEART
"She was enough to frighten a quieter horse than Ma-
lignant," said Dr. Vincent.
"She startled him effectually. He reared with terror
and then plunged and tore away into a furious gallop, his
hoofs thundering on the echoing and shaking ground long
after the horse was out of sight. The duke kept his seat
and exerted all his strength to hold in the terrified and
frantic brute, and so passed from view."
"But was no effort made by, his companions to-to-
to----"
"To do what? To stop that cyclone on four legs? No,
nothing could have been done. Had his companions-all,
or any of them-ridden after him, in the vain thought of
arresting the furious speed of the horse, their action would
have hastened the catastrophe, by rendering the situation,
which was doubtful and dangerous, certain and fatal. They
did go after the duke, however, as soon as it was deemed
safe to him for them to do so. They hoped to find him
safe with his exhausted or conquered horse. But-they
found him lying on the ground near the upper end of the
ferry road-dead-quite dead !"
"How awfully shocking !"
"The horse was gone--"
"Took the road in his flight."
"Yes, to the water side. There he was seen by the fer-
ryman, who sent a messenger up the ferry road to make
inquiries for his master. The messenger met the party
who had just discovered the accident, and were then bring-
ing the dead body of the duke on a hastily constructed litter
to the ferryboat. And so it was brought on to the castle."
"Awful! Awful! And the duchess ?"
"She has had heart disease for some years. I knew
that any sudden shock, or violent emotion, would be likely
to be fatal to her. And such a terrible shock as this might
have killed a perfectly healthy woman."
"Indeed it well might! But, Dr. Ellis, how happened
it that you were so promptly here?"
"One of the men who discovered the dead body of the
duke had the forethought to ride directly on to Hawke-
ville and summon me. But I might return the question,
and ask by what fortunate chance are you here so op-
portunely ?"



<pb n="25"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      25
"It was providential. I came to make an ordinary call,
not even suspecting that anything had happened. I learn,
also, that the duchess received a telegram this morning
announcing the demise of old Mr. Humber, of Humber
Hold."
"Yes. The event has been long looked for. Members
of the family seem to have been stricken down to-day like
birds by a scattering shot."
As the two gentlemen conversed they had not been idle.
Dr. Ellis occupied himself with carefully arranging and
composing the form of the dead duchess upon the lounge,
and covering it entirely over with a silken sofa quilt that
lay close at hand.
Dr. Vincent was going quietly from window to windew,
closing the shutters, and letting down the curtains.
"Will an inquest be necessary?" inquired the minister,
when he had finished his work.
"Oh, no; not at all. The cause of death in both cases
is too patent. I shall give certificates, and speak to the
coroner, and save the family such annoyance. Shall we
close the room now?"
"As you please," replied Dr. Vincent.
And the two gentlemen left the chamber of death, clos-
ing and locking the door after them.
The tumult of woe and horror throughout the castle
baffles all description.
The bereaved children of the departed duke and duch-
ess were assembled in one room, some violently excited.
some quite stupefied with amazement and grief.
Isoline Irvine, striving to keep down her own emotions
of sorrow, devoted herself to them.
The household servants went about their duties with
noiseless steps, silent lips and tearful eyes.
Dr. Ellis, Dr. Vincent and Mr. Ball took full direction
of affairs, and telegraphed the terrible news to the family
solicitor in London, to the Earl of Hawkewood at Hum-
ber Hold, and to Lieut. Cosmo Belle Isle at Portsmouth,
and to other distant relatives and friends of the afflicted
family.
Later in the evening the undertaker and his assistants
arrived at the castle, and immediately set about their sad
duties.



<pb n="26"/>
26           A TORTURED HEART
The mortal remains of the Duke and Duchess of Grand
Manors were prepared and laid in state in the long draw-
ing-room, and watchers appointed to guard the sacred
relicts through the night.
The sorrowful children of the noble pair remained in
one room together, united by their great common affliction.
Mr. Ball, Dr. Vincent and Dr. Ellis sat up in the li-
brary.
The servants were all at their posts.
No one thought of going to bed that night.
Late as it had been in that afternoon when the tele-
grams had been sent off, answers came in from many of
them before midnight.
The first that came was from the London lawyer. It
was sent to Dr. Vincent, and after expressing sympathy
for the family in their bereavement, announced the speedy
arrival of the sender.
The second was from Cosmo Belle Isle to Dr. Ellis, who
said that he was stricken to the heart with grief at this
great double bereavement, but would get leave of absence
and start for the castle instantly.
The third was from the Earl of Hawkewood to Mr.
Ball, saying that the sad news of the two sudden deaths
had filled his soul with grief and dismay, and that he
should leave for Hawkeville by the first southern bound
train.
During the course of the next day friends and relatives
began to arrive at the castle.
The Earl of Hawkewood, though he was the farthest off,
was the first to reach the castle.
After shaking hands with the three gentlemen, who had
so kindly remained on the watch in the strickep home, the
earl sent a message upstairs to his wife, notifying her of
his arrival and begging to see her.
At any other time, Volante would have sent an insolent
reply, or would have treated his request with silent con-
tempt.
Now, however, with her heart almost broken by sor-
row, she sent word to her husband that she was ill and
suffering, and begged that he would excuse her for the
present.
The earl explained to the doctor that he had only come



<pb n="27"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      27
on a flying visit for this occasion, to arrange the day of the
funeral, so that it should come in the latter part of the
week, for that he was obliged to go back to Northumber-
land first to attend the obsequies of his grandfather, which
were to be solemnized on the Thursday of this week; after
which he would be at liberty to return to Castle Belle
Isle to pay the last tribute of respect to the memory of
the late duke and duchess.
The second arrival was that of Cosmo Belle Isle, who
came on a fortnight's leave, and meant to spend the whole
of it with his afflicted cousins.
Soon after the lieutenant came the family solicitor, who
immediately by authority took the head of affairs.
The Earl of Hawkewood remained all day, and went
away early the next morning, without having seen his wife,
who still, making illness her plea, persisted in excusing
herself from receiving him.
The day succeeding the return of the Earl of Hawke-
wood to Northumberland, the mortal remains of the old
Squire of Humber Hold were conveyed to his family
vault.
On tle night following that day the Earl of Hawke-
wood, leaving Humber Hold in charge of his steward, took
the late train for the south, and in the afternoon of Friday
reached Castle Belle Isle.
The funeral of the Duke and Duchess of Grand Manors
took place on Saturday.
It was one of the most solemn and imposing pageants
that had ever been witnessed in that neighborhood.
Not only did all the county families attend in mourning
coaches, but many of the nobility and gentry from other
parts of the country, and one of the princes came, on the
part of the royal family.
An archbishop performed the funeral services. It was
just at the hour of sunset when the mortal remains of the
Duke and Duchess of Grand Manors were lowered into
the family vault beneath the little chapel attached to Castle
Belle Isle.
When the funeral guests returned to the castle, the will
of the late duke was produced by the family solicitor and
read in the presence of the assembled family, friends and
domestics.



<pb n="28"/>
28           A TORTURED HEART
We have before hinted that the Duke of Grand Manors
was not a wealthy man.
He had not much at his disposal to leave. The family
estate, however, was charged with the support and edu-
cation of his minor children until they should become of
age, at which time each child was to receive a small por-
tion. Little legacies were also left to old and faithful ser-
vants. But the bulk of the estate went with the title to his
grace's eldest son and heir-Theobold-Harold-John, Mar-
quis of Belle Isle, and now the Duke of Grand Manors.
]Mr. Oliver Ball, of Bowling Green, and the Rev. Dr.
James Vincent, Vicar of lIawkeville, were appointed trus-
tees of the estate and guardians of the minor children.
The will was acknowledged by all to be just and gen-
erous.
After the reading was over the friends and guests of the
family partook of an excellent collation in the dining-room,
and then dispersed to their several homes.
The ladies of Castle Belle Isle had not been seen by any
of the visitors. They had kept their rooms, except during
the funeral services and afterward during the reading of
the will, but their faces had, on both these occasions, been
completely hidden beneath the folds of their thick and
heavy black crape veils, and immediately after that reading
was over they had retired, to be seen no more by strangers.
But Dr. Vincent and Dr. Ellis went to bid them good-by
before leaving the castle, and were received with grateful
affection by the sorrowing girls, who then begged the cler-
gyman and the physician to come again, and to come often.
When the company had all gone, there remained in the
castle but a few inmates. There was the young Duke of
Grand Manors and his brothers and sisters. There was
the Earl and Countess of Hawkewood, and there were
Licut. Cosmo Belle Isle and Miss Isoline Irvine.
And even this little household circle was soon to be
broken up.
It was the intention of the Earl of Hawkewood to re-
turn with his countess to Hawkewood Hall.
The young Duke of Grand Manors was to return to
Oxford to complete his course. His brothers were to go
to Eton. His young sisters, including the infants in the
nursery, were to go into the family of their uncle, the arch-



<pb n="29"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     29
bishop. Cosmo Belle Isle was to return to his regiment,
and Isoline Irvine-ah! where was she to go?
She did not know, nor had she given a single thought
to the subject. She was too deeply absorbed in sympathy
with the sorrows of her young friends.
But no move could well be made while the young people
of the family were so prostrated by grief.
But in the second week after the deaths, and as the
lieutenant's leave of absence was drawing to a close, the
question that Isoline had never put to herself was sug-
gested by another.
It was on the first occasion after their bereavement that
the family had all assembled together at the breakfast
table.
When, after the morning meal was over, they were about
to withdraw from the room, and Isoline turned to follow
them out, Cosmo took her hand and said, in a low tone,
and with a pleading gaze:
"I want you to come and take a little walk with me on
the terrace. Will you come?"
"Yes," murmured Isoline, in reply.
And he drew her arm within his own and led her through
one of the French windows out upon the terrace.
"Isoline," he began, as they walked up and down in the
pleasant morning sunshine-"Isoline, the castle is to be
deserted, or left only in the charge of the servants next
week. I know the destination of every man and woman,
boy, girl and baby of the house except yours. I have not
heard yours."
"Mine ?" she inquired, looking at him in perplexity.
"Your plans, I mean. What are your plans?"
"Plans? About what?"
"About yourself, dearest. About yourself and your fu-
ture home."
"I have no plans."
"But you know that this household will be broken up
next week."
"Yes, I know."
"Where do you think of going when the others leave?"
"I-I-indeed, I never gave the subject a thought," said
the girl, with perfect frankness.
"Oh, child! child! You never thought for yourself, and



<pb n="30"/>
30           A TORTURED HEART
no one ever thought for you!" he exclaimed, in pity and
sorrow.
"But no one has had time to do that. Everyone has
had so much trouble," said the girl, in defense of her
friends.
Cosmo made a gesture of impatience, and then said:
"Isoline, dearest, do you know that my regiment sails
for Australia on the first of next month ?"
"I-I-yes, I heard so. I hoped, perhaps, that it was
not true, or that something might happen to prevent it,"
Isoline murmured, in the faltering tones that betrayed her
emotion.
"Nothing can happen to prevent it now. My dear un-
cle's sudden death has cut off all my source of influence
and all my hope of help. He has not even mentioned me
in his will. I fear I must have deeply offended him, Iso-
line," he sighed.
"But I do not think so. I never heard the duke utter
one word of blame or even of criticism concerning you,"
said the girl.
"No, probably not. Uncle would never have spoken of
offense, no matter how deeply I might have offended him.
He would have 'died and made no sign,' as the proverb
has it."
"But how could you have offended him, Cosmo?"
"Why, by resigning from the navy, and spending all my
little patrimony as soon as it came into my possession, in
purchasing a commission in the army."
"But why did you do that, Cosmo?"
"For many cogent reasons, love. In the first place, I
do not like the navy, and I do like the army. In the
second place, promotion is too slow and doubtful in the
navy, and it might be many years before I could hope to
get my ship, or I could hope to marry. In the third place,
even when I should at some late period of my life be able
to marry, the nature of the service would separate me from
my wife more than half the time. She could never ac-
company me. Now, with the army it is different. Pro-
motions are quicker and surer. I could marry at any time,
provided my love should love me enough to share my pov-
erty and privations in the earlier days; and I could take
her with me wherever she would be willing to go 1 There I



<pb n="31"/>
A TORTURED HEART                       51
That is the reason why I prefer to serve in the army rather
than in the navy. Don't you think they are good reasons ?"
"Oh, yes, indeed I dol" exclaimed the young girl, with
hearty frankness.
"Well, I have acted on these reasons. It is true, I did
not expect that my regiment would be ordered to Aus-
tralia. But since such is the case, I must not back out by
trying to get exchanged into another regiment, or any-
thing of that sort. Besides, I could not effect it, even if I
should try to do so. I have no influence, now uncle is
gone."
"I am very, very sorry," said Isoline, in tones that were
more eloquent than words.
"But, Isoline, I can take my wife with me to Australia,
if I please," he added, with a smile. "That is, if she should
be willing to go with me."
Isoline did not reply. She understood him too well.
And he also comprehended her silence.
He took her hand and whispered his next question:
"Isoline, will you be my wife and go with me to Aus-
tralia ?"
If she did not answer, it was because she could not,
just then. Her voice was choked with emotion.
"Isoline, it depends upon ourselves to be happy. Neither
you nor I have anyone but ourselves to consult. What say
you? We should have some few privations and hardships
to endure, but, as for me, I do not think there is a privation
in the world so distressing to lovers as the privation of
each other's society, nor any hardship half so hard to bear
as parting! What do you think?"
"I-I-agree with you. Parting would be the hardest
to bear," she said, speaking with great difficulty.
"Then, darling, we shall not part, shall we?"
"No," she murmured, softly.
"You will be my wife and go with me to Australia?"
"Yes," she answered, sweetly and clearly. "I will be
your wife and go with you."
And, not at all suiting the action to the word, she slipped
away from his arms and glided back into the house.



<pb n="32"/>
82           A TORTURED HEART
CHAPTER IV
THE LOVERS
As SOON as Isoline had left him, Cosmo Belle Isle strolled
into the house in search of the young duke.
"I must tell Grand Manors at once. So much is due
him. I hope the boy will not consider our action as any
disrespect to the memory of the late duke and duchess. He
must see the necessity of the course," he said to himself.
He came upon his cousin wandering aimlessly about the
halls and corridors of the castle, and looking very de-
jected.
"Come, John, let us go into the smoking room and have
a pipe together, old man. I have something to communi-
cate to you, as the head of the family," he said, taking
his cousin's arm and leading him toward the den in ques-
tion.
The young duke groaned as he yielded to the impulse.
Any allusion to his new dignity seemed to wound the sen-
sitive heart still suffering with grief for the loss of his
parents.
Arrived in the smokery, Cosmo Belle Isle drew from its
corner the comfortable easy-chair which had once been the  '
peculiar seat of the late duke, and pushed his successor
into it, and proceeded to light a pipe, which he handed to
him, saying, as he took another seat and began to fill an-
other pipe:
"You know, old fellow, that I sail with my regiment for
Hobart Town on the first of the month."
"Yes; and I am very sorry for it, Cosmo. If there is
anything I can do--"
"You cannot do anything, John. You are a minor, you
know."
"Yes, I know," sighed the young duke. "How long do
you expect to remain out there? A year? two years?
three ?"
"Whew! You had better ask: A century? two cen-
turies? three? Ah, John, the convicts are not the only
'lifers' sent out there !"
"I knew the regiments sent to Australia often remained
abroad for many years."



<pb n="33"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      83
"Ah, yes! If they have a change, it is from one Aus-
tralian station to another. I scarcely expect to return at
all-certainly not for a great while."
"I am truly grieved that you should go to so great a
distance for so long an absence, just at this juncture!
Could you not exchange into another regiment?"
"No, that would never do for me."
"But it is often done."
"I repeat that it would not do for me."
"Cosmo, old fellow, we are of the same blood, and we
owe each other something on that score. Now, if money
would do this thing and keep you near us, I am sure my
guardians would advance it; or if they wouldn't, the Jews
would, of course, and under such circumstances I should
not hesitate to call in the aid of the Jews," said the young
duke, earnestly, for he was very much attached to his
cousin.
"Thanks, dear fellow! You are a good sort! But this
is not a question of finance, John. It is a question of
honor, duty, character. Under the circumstances, I should
hold it as selfish, cowardly and utterly unworthy of a sol-
dier to attempt to shirk a disagreeable duty in that man-
ner. And under my circumstances it would be reprehensi-
ble in the highest degree. It would be unpardonable."
"I do not see why," said the young duke.
"What? Listen, then: After having received a train-
ing for the navy, the first thing I did, on reaching my
majority, was to resign my position in that service and
to spend my whole small patrimony in purchasing a com-
mission in the army, thus throwing away and rendering
useless the training of many years, and laying myself open
to the charge of levity and instability, and losing the con-
fidence of my uncle."
"Oh, no, I do not think you lost my father's good opin-
ion, Cosmo," interrupted the young duke.
"At any rate, I risked all that by so strangely leaving
the navy and joining the army. But, then, I disliked the
navy for more reasons than I have time to state at pres-
ent, and I liked the army for every reason. But having
made this change, I must not attempt to make another,
lest I utterly ruin my reputation for firmness and sta-
ility. I have joined the army. My regiment is ordered



<pb n="34"/>
34           A TORTURED HEART
to Hobart Town, and I must go with it. It was with no
thought of evading that duty that I sought this interview
with you, John."
"What was it, then, old boy? Speak out. Anything
that I can do--"
"You can do nothing, John, except to bid me God
speed ! You can do that. The fact is, my dear John, I
think of taking a wife with me," Cosmo explained, in a
low voice, and with a slight flush.
"Eh! What! A      wife? Whew! Who is the-un-
happy lady?" inquired the young duke.
Cosmo's flush deepened as he answered:
"The 'unhappy' lady is Miss Irvine."
"I bleg your pardon, old fellow! I meant no offense. I
was not even half in earnest, although the idea of a young
lady going out to that land of wild beasts and wilder men,
convicts and convict drivers, is, to say the least of it, ap-
palling !"
"I know it is; but it is the least of two great evils, the
other alternative being a separation for many years, if not
forever, between my love and me. I have laid the whole
case before Isoline. Well, she prefers to go with me, as I
certainly prefer to take her. The only other circumstance
to be considered is-- "  Here Cosmo paused and hesi-
tated.
"Is what, old man? Come, speak out!"
"Is-well, that I shall be obliged, as a matter of eti-
quette, to marry Miss Irvine before I take her out with
me."
"Bless my soul, I should think sol Whatever do you
mean ?"
"Only that, as our regiment is to sail on the first of the
month, and there are but fifteen days intervening, you
might think it wanting in respect to the memory of my
dear uncle and aunt for us to marry so soon after their
departure from us," Cosmo explained, gravely.
The young duke did not at once reply. Any allusion to 
his lost parents always deeply disturbed him. 
After a few moments, however, he said:
"All the circumstances justify and more than justify
your speedy marriage-they enforce it upon you. You
can put off the ceremony until the day before the ship is to



<pb n="35"/>
A TORTURED HEART                        85
sail, and you can have it performed as quietly as possible.
But Cuthbert and Victoria must attend you and Isoline to
the altar, and I must give away the bride. And, Cosmo,
dear old boy, if there is any way in which I can aid you,
let me know, will you ?"
The young lieutenant grasped his cousin's hand and
pressed it warmly as he answered:
'Only this-for which I should feel very grateful, as
I do for all your kindness, John-I wish you to break this
news to Lady Hawkewood and Lady Victoria, and make
them understand the necessity of the case, so that they
may not misconstrue our motives, or censure our course."
"They could not do that, but I will speak to them, all
the same. Now is there anything else I can do for you ?"
"No, best of friends and kinsmen, there is not," replied
Cosmo.
Then they talked of the voyage and the extra outfit that
would be required for both bridegroom and bride.
"I suppose the regulations of the service will post you
as to your needs; but you had better consult some one
who is experienced on this subject as to what Isoline will
want, for remember that the voyage takes from four to
six months, and takes you through every extreme of sea-
son, from an almost Arctic winter to a torrid summer and
back again," said the young duke.
"Yes, really, I must see about that," assented Cosmo
Belle Isle, gravely, as if he felt the cares and responsibil-
ities of a husband already settling upon him.
"Come to think of it, nol You are not to 'see about
that' at all! It is the ladies' province to look after the
bride's outfit-ordinary or extraordinary. My sisters will
attend to the matter, and it will serve to rouse them from
their deep dejection. Ah, Cosmo, it is a providential cir-
cumstance that the interests and responsibilities of life con-
tinually claim attention and force us from the contem-
plation of our losses," said the young duke, with a half-
suppressed sigh, as he secretly resolved to give his sister
carte blanche to outfit their young friend at his own ex-
pense.
The lieutenant pressed the hand of the speaker in silent
gratitude, who thereupon arose with a smile, and said:
"The sooner I speak to Volante and Victoria the better I



<pb n="36"/>
86           A TORTURED HEART
I know there is no time to be lost, for it took my sister
about four months to prepare her marriage outfit, and she
did not have to go to Australia, either!"
"Ah, but Lady Volante Belle Isle was a duke's daughter,
destined to become an earl's bride, while my beloved is
only a curate's orphan about to become a poor lieutenant's
wife," replied Cosmo, with an answering smile.
"At all events, there is no time to be lost, and besides I
wish to rouse my sisters by giving them something to do
immediately," concluded the young duke, as he laid down
his pipe, threw off his smoking cap and left the room to
seek the ladies.
He found them   all assembled in the boudoir of the
Countess of Hawkewood.
He sat down among them and at once told his news.
The effect was even more startling than he had antici-
pated.
They were all filled with astonishment at the prospect
of Cosmo Belle Isle's and Isoline Irvine's impending mar-
riage, and-at first-with the deepest dismay at the idea
of the bride's long voyage to the antipodes and her future
residence in Van Dieman's Land among savages, bush-
rangers and convicts.
But their brother, smiling at their consternation, as-
sured them that if Beelzebub is not half so black as he
is painted, neither is Hades half so horrible. He told them,
with some little pardonable exaggeration, that Van Die-
man's Land was a Garden of Eden and paradisal woods
and waters, hills and valleys, fruits and flowers, birds and
animals; that the earth was filled with fragrance and the
air with music, and the whole island redolent of health,
happiness and long life-"to the well-disposed and law-
abiding citizen"-he added, as a mental reservation, under
his breath.
"It may be all that  It may be all that! It may be a
paradise on earth; but it is a paradise peopled by demons
and evil spirits," exclaimed Lady Hawkewood.
"And we cannot send our angel to live among such,"
added Lady Victoria.
"Isoline need never to see a bushman or a convict unless
she should please to do so," replied the young duke. "She



<pb n="37"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      87
would have the society of the most cultivated among the
colonists."
"Squatters and ticket-of-leave people !" interrupted Lady
Ilawkewood.
"No, my dear sister, but the families of respectable emi-
grants, and of government officials, besides the ladies and
officers of the regiment," explained the young duke, who
took great pains to reconcile his relatives to the projected
marriage and voyage.
"Well," at length admitted Lady Hawkewood, "I am
glad the place is not so dreadful as we had imagined."
"And since we cannot prevent Isoline from going, the
next best thing we can do is to set about making her com-
fortable for the voyage," added Lady Victoria.
"Sensibly spoken, my dear little sister 1" exclaimed the
young duke, approvingly.
"She will want a thousand and one things for her out-
fit on such a voyage; but there are houses in London where
we can procure everything needed already made, and where
they can tell us much more than we could ever find out
what will be needed. I think, Volante, we will take Isoline
and go up to London to-morrow for a few days to purchase
her outfit," said Lady Victoria.
The plan was approved by her sister and brother.
The young duke bent down to the countess and in a
low tone expressed his wish and intention to be the banker
for this occasion.
Then he left them, and in going from the room passed
Isoline Irvine, who was coming in.
A glance at her serenely happy face proved that she did
not suspect him of possessing the secret of her impending
marriage.
The duke nodded, smiled and passed on.
The girl entered the boudoir and joined her young com-
panions, who received her with smiles-really, smiles-such
as she had not seen on any of their faces since their heavy
double bereavement-peculiar smiles, that aroused her sus-
picions, caused her to look conscious, and constrained her
to ask what amused them so much.
"Ah, you witch, you know very well!" said Lady Vic-
toria, springing up impulsively and throwing her arms
around Isoline's neck. "You see, we have heard all about



<pb n="38"/>
38           A TORTURED HEART
it! Cosmo, the vain fellow, could not keep his happiness
to himself! He would have died if he had not told John I
John would have suffocated if he had not told us. And the
result is that Volante, you and myself are going up to town
to-morrow to get the trousseau for the wedding and the out-
fit for the voyage !"
And here Victoria's strength gave way and she burst into
tears and wept from so many mixed emotions that she her-
self could not have rationally explained the cause of her
agitation.
But soon she wiped her sparkling eyes and smiled again.
The programme was carried out.
Lord Hawkewood happened to be called to Northum-
berland on business connected with the estate he had just
inherited there, and he was to be absent for a week.
This circumstance was a great relief to the countess,
whose relations with the earl were still of the coldest, most
distant and reserved nature.
Upon the plea of indisposition she had confined herself
to her room, and declined to see her husband.
The earl had written notes to her remonstrating with her
upon the injustice of this conduct toward him, but the
notes had always been returned to him unopened and in-
closed in a blank envelope.
The earl had repeatedly sought the family physician and
taken counsel with him on the subject.
But Dr. Ellis had declined to interfere in the matter, and
had earnestly recommended patient inactivity for the pres-
ent on the part of his lordship.
Then the call to Northumberland had come, and Lord
Hawkewood had left Castle Belle Isle without taking leave
of his ladv; but probably consoling himself with the
thought that at the breaking up of the household his re-
fractory countess would be compelled by circumstances to
return with him to Hawkewood Hall and conduct herself
in a more rational manner.
In view of this impending separation of the family, Lady
Hawkewood had settled upon no distinct course of action.
She was still resolved to keep aloof from her husband
until she could have a legal separation from him: though
now that the parents on whose protection and assistance



<pb n="39"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      39
she had relied were taken from her, she scarcely knew what
steps to take to secure the desired object.
Nor did she know whither she should go on the closing
up of the -astle-whether she should accompany her
younger sisters to their new home with their uncle, the
archbishop, or whether she should invite herself to spend
a few weeks with her parents' old neighbors, the Balls, of
Bowling Green.
But on one subject she was resolved-never to return to
Hawkewood Hall.
Just now, however, her personal troubles were forgotten
in her ardent sympathy and active co-operation with
Isoline Irvine in the preparation for the orphan's marriage
and voyage.
On the morning after the conversation just related, Lady
Hawkewood, Lady Victoria Belle Isle and Isoline Irvine,
all attended by the youthful Duke of Grand Manors, went
up by an early train to London, and engaged rooms at a
West End hotel.
And immediately after luncheon the ladies drove to an
extensive warehouse in Oxford Street, celebrated for its
specialty in wedding trousseaus and India outfits.
Here were complete sets for from fifty to five hundred
pounds.
Isoline had drawn out her money from the Hawkeville
bank, amounting in all to about two hundred pounds, and
in her modesty and discretion she would have selected a
plain but good outfit, costing about seventy-five pounds;
but the Countess of Hawkewood and Lady Victoria com-
pletely overruled her and insisted that they knew better
than she did, and they must therefore be intrusted with
making the selections.
Isoline sighed in acquiescence, as she put her purse in
the countess's hands, with a deprecating look that seemed to
implore her ladyship to be moderate.
Lady Hawkewood took the purse, with a smile, asked
the saleswoman for a list book, and, having procured one,
retired to some little distance from her companions, and
with lead pencil in fingers, marked the very best and most
extensive bridal and India outfits in the establishment.
"Send these articles to me at the Cambridge Hotel and



<pb n="40"/>
40           A TORTURED HEART 
the bill with them," she said to the saleswoman, as she 
returned the book and pencil and rejoined her companions.
From the outfitting warehouse they went to other stores, 
where they ordered great sea trunks and all necessaries for
the long voyage and the colonial residence.
And finally they got back to the hotel, where the young
duke joined them in time for a late dinner.
Their orders at the various warehouses and factories
where they had purchased goods were so well and so
promptly filled that they found their business in London
completed on the evening of the second day.
The next morning they returned to Castle Belle Isle.
In consideration of the fact that the young lieutenant
would be obliged to join his regiment one week before the
ship would sail for Australia, it was decided to make a
change in the day fixed for the marriage ceremony, and to
have it performed quietly in the parish church at Hawke-
ville on the morning of Cosmo's departure for Portsmouth,
so that his bride might accompany him.
Cosmo meanwhile had been corresponding with some of
his more experienced friends in regard to his marriage and
his voyage. Among the rest he had written to the surgeon
of his regiment, who had been on duty in Australia be-
fore, and who, in reply, among other items, wrote:
"My wife says that it will be absolutely necessary for
your bride to take out a maid with her, so as not to depend
on a convict servant, who, in nine cases out of ten, would
rob her."
This necessity had not, until the receipt of the surgeon's
letter, occurred to anyone concerned.
Now Cosmo mentioned the matter to his eldest cousin,
Lady Hawkewood, who at once summoned the housekeeper
and commissioned her to find a suitable young woman to
go out to Australia as lady's maid to the future Mrs. Cosmo
Belle Isle.
On the morning succeeding this event, as Isoline Irvine
sat alone in her chamber, engaged in looking over and de-
stroying some old letters, she was told that a young person
in deep mourning, and apparently also in deep trouble,
wished to see Miss Irvine.
"Who is she?" inquired the young lady, thinking, per-



<pb n="41"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     41
haps, that it was some one who had come about the lady's
maid's place.
"I really do not know, ma'am. She is a stranger to us
all. When I inquired her name she said it was of no con-
sequence. Shall I tell her that you are engaged, ma'am?"
inquired Mrs. Greylock, who had brought the message.
"No," said Isoline Irvine. "Show her up."
CHAPTER V
A LITTLE LIGHT ON A DARK MYSTERY
A SLENDER girl in deep mourning entered the room,
courtesied respectfully, and drew aside her heavy black
crape veil, revealing the thin, white face, light-blue eyes
and pale-yellow hair of Leonora Pond.
Miss Irvine arose quickly and held out her hand to her
former maid, exclaiming:
"Lona! Lona Pond, my dear girl, I am so surprised
and so pleased to see you. Sit down, child; don't stand.
You have had a long walk if you came on foot from
IHawkewood," she added, kindly.
"Yes, ma'am, I walked from Hawkewood, and do feel
a bit spent," replied the girl, with another deep courtesy.
"Then sit down at once. You look far from strong."
The girl courtesied a third time, and, with a very hum-
ble and deprecating air, took a cushioned footstool and
seated herself on it.
"Now tell me what I can do for you, Lona," said the
young lady.
"I thank you, ma'am. You may have heard that I have
lost my stepmother, ma'am," said the girl, quietly, raising
her light eyes to the face of her former mistress.
"Yes, dear Lona, I heard it, and I should have gone
to see you in your trouble but for the double bereavement
that afflicted this family at the time and kept me here,"
said Mliss Irvine, with a feeling of compunction at the
thought of having neglected the poor orphan in her sor-
row.
The next words of Lona Pond absolved her from blame:
"I knew you would have come to me hut for the trouble
in the castle. And mother's death was very sudden. Apo.



<pb n="42"/>
42           A TORTURED HEART
plexy, Dr. Ellis said it was, and it was all over so soon- 
funeral and all."
"I am very sorry for you, Lona."
"I know you are very kind, ma'am. She was only my
stepmother, to be sure, and a stepmother ain't like a real
mother, and I used to think she was unkind to me; but 
still she was the only friend and protector I had in the
world, and now she's gone, I think that she was not so
unkind after all, and that her strictness was meant for my
good, and that I myself was often perverse and undutiful.
Death opens our eyes sometimes, ma'am, and makes us feel
very different toward them that are gone."
"It does, indeed, Lona! I know that from my own ex-
perience. The worst part of our grief for the departed
is oftentimes remorse, or, at least, compunction. We are
none of us as good as we ought to he to each other, and
we never find it out until it is too late. But, Lona, my
dear girl, what can I do for you?"
"If you please, ma'am, I came about the place. Mrs.
Caraway has been inquiring for a lady's maid to go out
with you to Australia. ma'am," said the girl, rising, and
courtesying very demurely.
"Oh, sit down. Do you know of any suitable person
who would like to take the situation?" inquired Miss
Irvine.
"If you please, ma'am, I should like to take it myself
if you please to think I would do," said Lona, humbly and
deprecatingly, as she resumed her seat.
"You, Lona?   Do you really wish to go to Australia
with me?" inquired the young lady, in great surprise
"Oh, yes, indeed, ma'am, if you please! I wish to go
very much, if you would only condescend to take me !" re-
plied the girl, clasping her thin hands in the earnestness
of her appeal.
"But do you know what sort of a country this Australia
is?" continued the lady.
"Oh, yes, ma'am, I do! I know it is a wild wilderness,
full of black, savage barbarians, and robbers, and mur-
derers, and man-eaters, and ravenous wild beasts, where sol-
diers have to be sent to keep them from destroying each
other, root and branch. I knew all about that country,
ma'am, from hearsay, long ago," replied the girl.



<pb n="43"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     43
"And yet, knowing all this, or thinking that you know it,
you wish to go out with me ?" inquired the young lady, with
a smile.
"Oh, yes, indeed, ma'am, I do, if you will please to take
me. I have no friend left here now but you, and when you
go I wish to go with you, if you will be so good as to take
me, ma'am," said the girl, anxiously.
"But how about leaving your service at Hawke Hall?"
"Oh, ma'am, yes! Mrs. Curran, the housekeeper, who
has the hiring of the housemaids, says she'll excuse me, and
likewise recommend me willingly, which I know she will
do, ma'am, especially as she wants to have her own niece
in my place, as is but natural. That will be quite right,
ma'am, if you will only please to take me," pleaded Lona.
"I would be very glad to have you, my dear girl; you
may be sure of so much; for just consider what a happi-
ness it will be to me in that far, foreign country to have
a companion who has grown up with me from childhood;
the only objection is your state of health."
"Oh, if you please, ma'am, Dr. Ellis was saying to me
himself that a sea voyage would be the only thing to set
me up, and if I could only get a place as maid with some
lady going to the Indies, it would make a woman of me.
And that was before I heard you were going abroad,
mna'am."
"Were you so much indisposed as to require medical ad-
vice, my poor girl ?"
"Oh, no, ma'am; it was when the doctor was called in
to my'stepmother that he happened to take notice of me
and pull me over the coals for looking so badly."
"Yes, and, by the way, what have you been doing to
yourself to make you so weak, Lona?"
"I don't know, dear ma'am, unless it is the trances,"
sighed the girl.
"The-" questioned the young lady in perplexity.
"The     "
"Trances; yes, ma'am, I am sure I grow weaker and
weaker and weaker with every one I come out of."
"But what trances are you talking of? I never knew
that you were subject to trances," said Miss Irvine, in
still greater perplexity.



<pb n="44"/>
44,          A TORTURED HEART 
"No more I never was, ma'am, until Old Mother Crook
down at Demondike put me into one."
"I do not comprehend. Mother Crook put you in a
trance ?" 
"Yes, ma'am; and have put me into many a one since. 
Maybe you would not believe it, ma'am, but I am a clair-
voyant," whispered the girl, with a mysterious look.
"A clairvoyant, Lona? What do you mean? How came
you to be a clairvoyant?" inquired the wondering young 
lady.
"I don't know, ma'am, I'm sure. I never suspicioned
myself to be one of them kind of folks until Old Mother
Crook told me."
"How did she know, pray?" inquired the young lady,
with an incredulous smile.
"She knowed it by my light complexion and light eyes
and hair, so very light, she said; and she put me in a
trance, and made me follow-follow-follow--"
"Follow whom, my girl?" demanded Miss Irvine, impa-
tient of the speaker's awkward hesitation. "Follow
whom ?"
"A friend of her own," replied Lona Pond, as her
white, wan face flushed with a delicate pink.
"That old person is an impostor. She ought to be sent
to the workhouse," exclaimed Miss Irvine.
"I don't know, dear ma'am; but she does put me in
these trances and makes me follow anyone she likes, if it is
to the other end of the world, and tell her where they are
and what they are doing. And when I come out of my
trances I can't remember a thing of what I have seen or
said, and I feel that confused in my mind and faint in my
body as I am like to turn foolish or die."
"And you will become imbecile in mind and body if
you continue such sinful and suicidal nonsense," said
Isoline, with a feeling of indignation against Nan Crook.
"It is what I am beginning to fear, dear ma'am. There
is no satisfaction to me in these trances and this clair-
voyance if I cannot remember what I have seen, and come
out of them as weak and silly as a newborn babe. And
besides--"   The girl dropped her voice and hesitated.
"Besides what, Lona?"
"I am getting to fear Old Mother Crook. She seems



<pb n="45"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      45
to have a power over me, even when she is far away from
me. Often I feel her drawing and drawing me, when I
don't want to go to her. And often I feel like falling
into a trance when she isn't anywhere near me," whis-
pered the girl, with a shiver.
"Nonsense! Fancies! You shall go out to Australia
with me, Lona. What you have just confided to me settles
that point. It would be monstrous of me to leave the little
companion and attendant of my childhood alone and help-
less at the mercy of such a dangerous old charlatan. She
would kill or craze you in a very short time. I am to be
married this day week, Lona, and to leave with my hus-
band for Portsmouth. Do you be ready to join me on that
day, at the latest, and sooner if it be possible."
"Oh, thank you, ma'am! Thank you very humbly! You
have made me so happy, if you please, ma'am. And my
month will be up on the day after to-morrow, which will
be Sunday, and I can come on Monday, ma'am, if that
will suit," said Lona Pond, with an expression of genuine
pleasure and gratitude on her fair, thin face, as she arose
to depart.
"That will suit me perfectly, Lona. I am very glad
that you are to go with me, child."
"I thank you, ma'am. Good-morning, ma'am."
And Lona Pond courtesied and left the room.
It was a subject for sincere congratulation from the
young ladies of the castle when they were informed by
the bride-elect that she had secured the services of her
former maid to accompany her to Australia.
Letters from Lord Hawkewood to his wife and to his
brother-in-law announced his speedy return to Castle Belle
Isle.
Lady Hawkewood threw his lordship's letters to herself,
unread, into the fire.
The young Duke of Grand Manors read the earl's letters
to himself, and proclaimed their contents to the house.
hold.
Late in the week Lord Hawkewood reached Castle Belle
Isle.
His lordship was warmly welcomed by all the family
with the exception of the countess, who kept her room and
sent down an excuse of indisposition; and in one sense of



<pb n="46"/>
46            A TORTURED HEART
the word, at least, the plea was a just one, for she was cer-
tainly not "disposed" to see the earl.
So, as the traveler had arrived just before dinner, the
family dined without her ladyship.
The husband's repeated efforts to see his wife during the
evening were a total failure.
So his lordship contented himself with the company of
his relatives in the drawing-room.
He had heard of the approaching marriage of Lieut.
Belle Isle and Miss Irvine, and he took the first proper op-
portunity of congratulating the young couple on their ap-
proaching happiness, at the same time begging the bride's
acceptance of a beautiful set of rubies set in pearls, which
he had found time to select for a wedding present as he
passed through London on his way down to Cornwall. 
Isoline frankly expressed her grateful appreciation of
the offering, telling his lordship that they were not only
her favorites of all jewels, but the first set of any sort that
she had ever possessed.
Later, when the circle of friends separated for the night,
the Earl of Hawkewood retired to the chambers he had oc-
cupied alone since his wife's illness.
But instead of going to bed he dismissed his valet, and
seated himself before his writing-table and began a letter
to the countess.
When he had finished, enveloped and sealed it, he laid
it on the table, ready for delivery in the morning, saying:
"I think, if I know my lady, that must bring her to
terms."
After which he undressed and went to bed.
The family were astir at the usual hour the next morn-
ing.
The earl, on leaving his chamber, took the letter in his
hand to watch his opportunity of delivering it to the
countess.
He could not trust it to a servant, because it bore rather
a curious superscription, which was intended to enforce the
attention of the countess, but must have excited comment
if seen by anyone else.
He entered the breakfast room, where all the family were
assembled with the exception of Lady Hawkewood.



<pb n="47"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      47
In vain he waited for her until the morning meal was
quite over.
Her ladyship did not appear.
Nor could he inquire for the countess. The young peo-
ple present were presumed to be ignorant of the estrange-
ment existing between the young married pair, which
exiled the husband from the wife's apartments, and from
any personal knowledge of her condition; and he did not
wish to arouse their suspicions by asking questions.
But presently some one questioned him.
"What is the matter with Volante that she is not at
breakfast this morning, Hawkewood ?" bluntly inquired the
young lieutenant.
"Her ladyship is indisposed," somewhat coldly replied
the earl.
"Sorry to hear it; just as you have come home, too.
Volly was well enough yesterday," blurted Cosmo.
Nobody answered him.
"Nothing serious, I hope, Hawkewood?" he persisted.
"Nothing serious, I believe," replied the earl, rising
from the table.
His example was followed by the others.
"Come with me, Vicky, my dear-I wish to speak with
you," he whispered to his young sister-in-law, as he drew
her arm within his own and led her into the library.
Here he took a blank envelope from the table drawer,
slipped his letter into it and put it in the hands of little
Lady Victoria, saying:
"There, love! Run up to your sister and put this in
her hands, and then run away again without saying a
word. Do you understand?"
"No !" answered the girl, staring at her brother-in-law.
"It is a little joke. Now do you understand?"
"Oh, yes!" exclaimed the little lady, although she cer-
tainly did not understand in the least; and she ran off to
do her errand.
Lady Hawkewood was sitting in her easy-chair by the
window of her boudoir, looking out over the terraced
ground and the expanse of sea beyond.
She was carelessly wrapped in a dressing gown of soft
black India silk, lightly trimmed with black crape, and



<pb n="48"/>
48            A TORTURED HEART 
she wore upon her dark hair a little breakfast cap of white
crepe lisse.
Beside her stood a satinwood stand, on which lay her
solitary breakfast service of fine white Canton china and
gold plate.
There came a light rap at the door, accompanied by the
voice of Lady Victoria.
"May I come in, Volante?"
"Certainly," replied the countess.
"Oh    Have not you done breakfast ?" inquired the girl, 
as she advanced into the room and saw the service still
standing.
"Yes, I have quite finished. What is it, Victoria? Does 
Isola want--" began the countess, but her sister inter- 
rupted her. 
"It is not about Isola. I was told to give you this," ex- 
claimed the little lady. 
And she laid the blank envelope down on the table and 
vanished.
"What does the child mean by such a freak?" mur-
mured the countess, as she took up the blank envelope and
drew the inclosure from it.
Recognizing the handwriting of the earl in the super-
scription, she frowned, and would have thrown the letter
into the fire had not a few words attracted and fixed her
attention, as the writer had intended they should.
These words were as follows: "IMPORTANT. A pro-
posal for the adjustment of our difficulties is submitted
within."
Lady Hawkewood now did what she had not done since
the beginning of the estrangement between herself and 
the earl. She opened and read his letter-read it the more
willingly that it was couched in the coldest, most formal
and businesslike terms.
"CASTLE BELLE ISLE, Oct. 27, 18-.
"To THE COUNTESS OF HAWKEWOOD-MADAM: Your
sudden anger, long-continued resentment, and obstinate
silence as to the cause of offense, have nearly discouraged
me from seeking an explanation with you; but such an



<pb n="49"/>
A TORTURED HEART                       49
explanation you must acknowledge to be absolutely neces-
sary in view of the duties we owe to ourselves, our friends
and the world.
"That you have, or that you believe you have, just cause
of offense against me is evident.
"Of the true nature of this offense, real or fancied, I
remain in total ignorance.
"Now, I ask you if there is common justice or human-
ity in condemning me unheard?
"If I had reason to suppose that I had been injured by
any man or woman I should not bury the wrong in my
own heart to embitter my own life and destroy my faith
in human nature. I should consider such a cause unjust
and cruel to the supposed wrongdoer. I should consider
that he had the same right to know the nature of the
charge against him, that he might defend himself, if he
could do so, as the criminal, even the very worst criminal,
has to an open trial and a full opportunity of defense.
"I claim from you, madam, only the right of a fair trial.
I protest against being condemned unheard.
"Give me an interview, arraign me, and if I plead guilty,
or should be proved guilty of any offense for which I
should forfeit your esteem and confidence, I will submit
to any penalty in the form of separation or divorce that
you may please to adjudge.
"Pending your action, I remain, madam, your most
obedient servant,                     HAWKEWOOD."
The countess read this strange letter quite through.
Then holding it in her hand, upon her lap, she mused
upon it for some moments.
"The most reckless letter, under the circumstances, that
I ever read !" she muttered to herself. "Does he not know
why I will not associate with him any longer? Does not
his conscience warn him? Does he pretend that he wants
an explanation, because he believes that I will not have
the courage to give one? Oh! I have but little courage
for such a terrible ordeal!" she added, with a shudder;
"but whether he really desires an interview with an ex-
planation, or whether he only pretends that he does, in the
belief that I am afraid tc j-.ake one, and that he will in
this manner place me at disadvantage-one thing is cer-



<pb n="50"/>
50           A TORTURED HEART
tain: he has uttered an unanswerable argument, given a 
convincing reason why I should not condemn him unheard;
but give him the felon's privilege of defending himself!
He cannot do it, of course! Neither could the wife poi-
soner, who was executed last week, but who had his trial
all the same! Yes, Lord Hawkewood, you shall have your
will! I will arraign you before me to answer for the 
murder of the late earl !"
CHAPTER VI
THE SECRET OUT
THE countess arose and touched the bell.
She looked very pale and grim. Her naturally bright 
and beautiful face was blanched and fixed as in the stony
rigidity of death.
Mrs. Greylock entered the room.
"Take away this breakfast service, and then go to the
Earl of Hawkewood and say that I wish to see him here,"
said the lady, in a low tone and with an averted face.
The woman, made uneasy by the tone and manner of her
mistress, looked up, but made no comment With a-
"Yes, my lady," she withdrew.
- The countess turned her easy-chair around until it stood
with its back to the bay window. Then she seated herself
in it, so that her face was in shadow. She had no intention
of permitting the earl to discover the too evident signs of
emotion in her countenance.
The door opened, and his lordship entered the chamber,
bowed as if entering the presence of an honored acquaint-
ance, and then took the chair that his wife indicated, im-
mediately in front of her own, but a few feet from her.
The light from the bay window shone full upon his face,
and revealed a pale, disturbed countenance. Neither of the
two spoke for the first few moments, during which they
gazed upon each other-she with a white, grim look, he
with a pale and twitching one. She was the most pro-
foundly affected; he the most agitated.
Yet he was the first to break the silence.



<pb n="51"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      51
"You have sent for me-at last, madam," he said, in a
low, monotonous tone.
"I have sent for you-at your request, my lord. You
wanted an explanation," she replied.
"I wanted an explanation. Yes, madam."
"Upon what subject, my lord?"
"Can you ask? Can you doubt? Upon the subject of
the sudden and strange offense you took against me nearly
three months ago, and your persistent estrangement from
me since."
"You want an explanation? You shall have it. Will
you carry your memory back for fifteen months, to the
night of the late Earl of Hawkewood's murder?" inquired
the countess, in a low, stern tone, while she fixed her eyes
upon his eyes, which fell under her gaze, while his pale
face blanched to a more deadly pallor.
"No need. I have never for a moment forgotten that
night," he answered, in a voice scarcely above a whisper.
"I should suppose not. You may also remember the
sudden illness which struck me down and prevented my
appearance at the coroner's inquest?"
"I remember."
"Even had I been well, I presume I should not have been
called as a witness; for no one had the least reason to
suppose that I could have thrown any light upon the mys-
tery of that murder."
"Yes?" breathed the earl, in the same mechanical man-
ner.
"For-attend to me, Lord Hawkewood!-I was, provi-
dentially, in the bachelors' corridor that night, when on my
way from my bedchamber to the drawing room in search of
a lost jewel-and again on my return from the drawing
room to my bedchamber after having found the jewel,"
said the countess, speaking slowly and keeping her eyes
fixed upon the face of the earl while she spoke.
"Well?" he gasped.
"I saw the earl alive and well, and heard him speak on
dismissing the two accused men, Gow and Delaplaine, from
his room that night. I know they left the earl alive and
well, and went their way out of the castle. Therefore
neither Gow l.i'Mere guilty of murdering the
earl."   .    YUNIVtI^N
L LIBRARY                \
1111        ..^    l      -1Q    c    r



<pb n="52"/>
52           A TORTURED HEART
"No !" panted Lord Hawkewood. 
"Now, who murdered the earl? Do you know, Lord
Hawkewood?" she asked, fixing her eyes upon the man
sitting opposite to her, as if she would read his soul.
His face flushed to the darkest crimson, and then 
blanched to marble. He did not reply.                    !
"Your silence speaks more strongly than words could de-
dare. You do know who murdered the late earl. And 
knowing that, you perfectly understand why I can never
tolerate your presence again. Leave me now, Lord Hawke-
wood, and let all future intercourse between you and myself 
be made through solicitors," said the countess, in a hard,  ,
cold, stern voice.
Her words and manner seemed to rouse him and restore
his self-possession. He started to his feet, exclaiming: 
"You wrong me, Volante! Bitterly and cruelly wrong 
me! I thought-I feared-from your sudden and intense
antipathy, that you suspected me of a crime too atrocious
to be named; but the thought was too monstrous to be en-
tertained! I dismissed it as an impossible theory  Yet 
it would seem to be too true! You do suspect me-me, 
your husband, of this heinous crime? You say-"
"I have not accused you, my lord! But 'a guilty con-
science needs no accuser,' it is said," interrupted the count-
ess, with a scornful look.
"You said that I knew who murdered the late Earl of 
Hawkewood!" he vehemently exclaimed.
"And do you not know?" she solemnly inquired.
"No! As the Lord is my judge, I do not!" earnestly
replied the earl.
"What? You say that you do not know the assassin of
the late earl?"
"As I hope to be saved, I do not!"
"Then I do," solemnly declared the countess.
"You?" faltered the earl, in a fainting voice.
"Yes, I!"
"How long since you have known this?"
"Since the night of our going home to Hawkewood Hall,
on the first of last September! Since the hour of that
night when I met you in the bachelors' corridor, and, recog-
nizing you in the half light, fell into that deep swoon which



<pb n="53"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      53
nearly ended my life!-which I wish had, indeed, ended
my life!"
"Volante   I charge you in the name of justice-in the
name of Heaven-to speak plainly, that I may know how
to answer you !" urged the earl, in all the earnestness of
innocence.
"I will speak plainly! To go back again to the night
of the tragedy, fifteen months ago! I told you that on that
night I saw the late earl dismiss Gow and Delaplaine from
his room and shut the door after them."
"You did."
"That was while I was on my way down to the drawing
room, about four o'clock in the morning. Are you listen-
ing ?"
"With all my soul."
"Two hours later, when, after a long search, I had found
my lost jewel and was returning to my chamber, I passed
through the bachelors' corridor, and saw the real murderer
of the late earl stealing from his room. I did not recognize
the man as anyone I had ever seen previously. I did not
know that he was an assassin fresh from the bedside of his
victim. I only saw in the half light that it was a pallid
man, in a dark dressing gown and a black cap with a gold
tassel, and I only thought that he was some guest staying
in the house, who had been taken sick in the night and had
gone to the room of his host for assistance. That is what
I saw and what I thought then. The next morning, when
the murder was discovered, and I recalled the form of the
man I had seen in the darkness before day, at the door of
the murdered earl's chamber, I felt sure that he was the
assassin and that his pallor was the pallor of guilt and ter-
ror, not of illness. I should have given this testimony at
the coroner's inquest had I not been stricken almost unto
death by the shock. When I was sufficiently convalescent
to talk of the tragedy and learn that Gow and Delaplaine
had been accused of the murder, knowing, as I knew, they
were both free from that blood-guiltiness and that another
man was the assassin, I sent for my father and for a magis-
trate and made an affidavit of what I had seen and heard in
the bachelors' corridor on the night of the murder. You
surely must have heard of my deposition at the time, my
lord," said Lady Hawkewood icily.



<pb n="54"/>
54           A TORTURED HEART
"I did," replied the earl, who had somehow regained his
self-possession and spoke in a calm tone.
"And now I come to the point," continued the countess,
severely. "On the anniversary of that tragic night, you
and myself had come home to Hawkewood Hall. The time,
place, and association depressed me greatly. Being alone
in my room toward midnight, I grew very nervous, and
finally left my chamber and walked out to look for you.
I passed through the bachelors' corridor. It was dark but
for the moonlight that came through the oriel window at
the end of the corridor. It looked as it had looked on that
fatal night. As I went on I saw a man emerge from the
room formerly occupied by the late earl. I nearly swooned
with horror even then, for the man wore the same dark
dressing gown, the same black cap with the gold tassel, and
stood in the same light as the assassin, on that fatal night
twelve months before."
"Well, well, well?" inquired the earl.
"I was then so transfixed with amazement and horror
that I could not move. The picture was a reproduction, a
facsimile, of the scene of the previous year. I was spell-
bound to the spot while the man came toward me-came up
to me. Oh ! great Heaven I I recognized the murderer then,
and I swooned-I would it had been unto death I" groaned
the countess, dropping her convulsed face into her hands.
"Speak out!" exclaimed the earl, in a voice of despera-
tion. "Charge me! Charge me distinctly    Tell me that
in the midnight visitor to the bachelors' corridor on that
fatal night of the tragedy you recognized me-your hus-
band !"
" You know that I did !" replied the countess, in a hollow
voice.
"You speak t:uly," said the earl, with a voice and man-
ner strangely calm under the circumstances, and in contrast
to his previous agitation. "You speak truly. It was I
whom you saw coming from my cousin's chamber on the
night of his murder. But, Volante, I swear by all that I
hold sacred in life, and by all my hopes of salvation, that I
am as guiltless as yourself of my poor cousin's death !"
Lady flawkewood started and stared at him with the ut-
most intensity for a few breathless minutes, and then mur-
mured, slowly:



<pb n="55"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     55
"Is-it-possible? Can-this--be--true?"
"As the Lord in Heaven hears me speak, I utter truth
when I repeat that I am guiltless of my cousin's death!
I will swear it by any oath you may please to administer.
But, oh, Heaven! that a husband should find it necessary
to deny such a charge from his wife 1" exclaimed the earl,
in sudden bitterness of spirit that carried conviction of his
sincerity to the mind of the countess.
Her fixed, white, stern face changed; her color came and
went; she became deeply agitated.
"Since I have wronged you so extremely, I do most
humbly beg your pardon, my lord. Yet I feel that that is
not enough, though I do not know how to atone for so
great a wrong," she muttered, in a broken and husky voice.
"Say no more about it, Volante. Let this kiss seal our
reconciliation," said the earl, stooping and pressing his lips
to hers.
And now her overwrought nerves gave way; she burst
into tears and sobbed convulsively.
"Don't-don't! You will hurt yourself!" he pleaded,
caressing and trying to soothe the excited and almost hys-
terical woman.
But in vain.
The countess had never really loved the earl. Her mar-
riage with him had been merely a conventional union, en-
tered into for the purpose of pleasing her parents and secur-
ing rank, wealth, and title, and a handsome establishment
near her own family, upon whom her affections had now
concentrated.
But he had loved her as much as he was capable of loving
anyone, and so he had won some affection from her in
the early weeks of their marriage, and this good feeling be-
tween the young pair had continued up to the time of her
fancied discovery of his crime, from which date her whole
being had revolted from him with such violence as nearly
to overwhelm her own life or reason, as has been seen.
For months she had thought of him only with horror and
detestation.
She had resolved to repudiate him at all cost of pride
or position.
She had consented to receive his visit this morning only
because she had understood that it was offered for the pur-



<pb n="56"/>
56           A TORTURED HEART
pose of making preliminary arrangements for a final and
permanent separation.
In their interview she had been misled by his admissions
up to the point of understanding that he actually confessed
the crime of which she had accused him, and the guilt
which she had been visiting upon his head for the last three
months.
And now to be told and to be assured, beyond the possi-
bility of a doubt, that he was innocent of the death of the
late ear], and that she herself had bitterly wronged him by
her false accusation.
This was too much for the nerves of Volante, whose sobs
now shook her delicate frame as though they would have
shaken it to dissolution.
"Dear Volante, why do you grieve so bitterly?  One
would be almost tempted to suspect that you are sorry to
discover that it was not your husband who did that deed,"
whispered the earl.
"Oh, do not speak of it I I am overwhelmed with sorrow
and shame!" she sobbed.
"Yet you have, at least, the consolation of knowing that
your husband is guiltless of the crime which false appear-
ances seemed to fix upon him."
"Yes, but how can you forgive me? How can I forgive
myself ? Oh, Lewis, you have a more generous nature than
mine, else how could you condone such an offense as I have
given you?" she wept.
"Mv dear wife, you did not willingly believe me guilty,
did you ?" he gently inquired.
"Olh, no, no, no!" she cried.
"Then how are you to blame? You were deceived by
circumstances and you suffered in consequence even more
than 1 did."
"Ah, Heaven only knows how intensely I suffered-al-
most to the wreck of my reason!"
"There is one lesson to be learned from this, my love-
never to harbor a suspicion against a friend; but if any
suspicion comes into your mind, have the sense of justice
and the moral courage either to cast it out and trample it
under foot, or to take it to that friend to be confirmed or
destroyed. If you had breathed this suspicion to me-this
suspicion that amounted to conviction-this suspicion



<pb n="57"/>
A  T ORW' th K     f' R  TT           5T7
which has been   msnminug your life and destroin .our
happiness for three months paSt-I could have dissipated
it at the beginning as easily as now."
 Oh, how  ould I have spoke on suh a subject to you?
I should never have spoke  of it if you had not drawn
forth the Words by forcel" she sobbed.
"Theh I, too, ave been to blames  I should have com-
pelled your confidece before this. Perhaps I would have
done.it had not your medical ,atudant firbidden me to
disturb you upon any pretense," he added.
Her sobs wee subsiding. She was growing calmer.
He aow ventured to ask her:    .
Volante, though you entertained thi terrible supicion,
you never imparted it to anyone?"
"I? Never neverl It oppressed my bosom-it sufo-
cated me almost to death, but I would have died rather than
have hinted the horror to anyhuma   being-ven to my
own motherl No one ever suspected the reason     f my
sttge seisure and hence they feared that my intellect was
impaired," said the countess earnestly 
"You exercisedagret courage and frtitd e by such reti-
cence ender the circumstance, amy dear."
She did not reply to this observatn; but in her turn bhe
asked a question:
"Lewis will you tell me, if you do not mind, what took
you to your cousin's room at that unusual hour, when your
presence ther has caused an a6most fatal mispprehen-
sion ?" 
The earl fluhed and paled, hesiated and trembled, but
soon recovered his self.contre. and answered:
"Of course, I do not mind telling you, dear. There
should be no more reserve betwen us now. No, nor shall
there be. I went to Horace's room from the cause that you
yourself divined when you first saw me at the door. on the
night of the tragedy-,from the necessities of illness. I was
taken ill in my chamber, with cramp in the chest, to which
I am rather subject, as you have reason to know."
^ye.,                                .;
"Brandy, you are aware, always relieves me."
"Yes."
UBut I had none at hand; nor did I know where to find
the butler, or any ervant who could get it for ma"



<pb n="58"/>
.*  i, I* I '[ ''  In :  Ati*  ' '^lll^ ^ ,l^ i.
' '           r' :f: "
"I, o     w     iw' qti  st   ''
;}:~ JT q''S" i '' ll. ;
. isa'  a k      A  ''I' 
boa  oke p;  oe. :':'~,'[
'a ' V  'i 3 t' '  '^  i -,  '  , "'
~~".,~~~~~~ ~~'''"" ~~ ,   :'''^^^^  ,
. [,* '  , a  ' .; . , . 'o : ft  ' 'a  'i., ' ;, !. " '
  i ,  .  ,  -  ,   ,  .  ' .  .  ',1  :i ' '  i'''  '  '''  1 "  "' u? -
;.  '.  '!'aridi p'edt  ;ft.,im. *iS  i ' i,
,;*.-* * _, tei oritedi  vw  1^^  Ji^  . 
:~~~ *' 1*a  c a  oalj  ttTMm^ .iybi.'^y'fft*!^ " '



<pb n="59"/>
..t e..  . .."                  ..;'  t  '  '  1'  :
LA~ ~ .nS;~~~fl~~tfl~~~.efl~~ .'
*ti . 4  *i *'lt  ",'           , i 
t;4   t  -.i,                 '.' i',te 
* u aio' h ih ttl   Ii ltot ' ta  ; a'   * t ' ';(i 
.^^ 1 ',jth'1"'              '" ''
. dei  i anr a ht            * n.; i. 
  ,..- ...4**
'.^^^ita^^^tll ;*'.':* *
.I: IPcael~^into < ilh ancld.ft
, ',  : " t' , *,,.    ....  .., $  ,'
Iz* r ''.d*,P? j(siea'i.   4 " ;J,'i ,  ', ,'u. . ' 't
o * mf 't|^s , ' ^  J o  ti   * * ,, !
..   , he  te  ,  , / ., q t t  .4 io!d. ', 4   he
li* b.s.te^^c .tte?       :    .. ,*
"4z in ac !  t tM uizbtwt  apjtado
.. .." '    .X i  ,   o .  . it
ta2:; .u     that ' s !rcs i
e;id ,,. jjefll  , ,' ya  1~i" crind <b  '',ote, ,lgreat .
^b^yqb h              ft iatmthdibl r le :wh
,,wtbe ,ext mor ling, ;r at te c ,, j e! . ' '  t, why
;,' ' ,  ': .,1  ,'  '  '  "  ,:'  '  ', ,,
would haw eeto ntod Inhefrtpaewie



<pb n="60"/>
60           A TORTURED HEART
my nerves were still in a shaken condition, I felt deeply
humiliated by the memory of my weakness of the preceding'
night, and did not like to expose that weakness to the com-
ments--perhaps to the contempt-of others. In the sec-
ond place, by acknowledging my nocturnal visit to my cous-
in's chamber, and my discovery of the murder, which I
had failed at the moment to reveal, I must have laid my-
self open to the darkest suspicions, if not to immediate
arrest; for it is a maxim in law, that when a murder has
been committed by an unknown hand, we are to look for
the murderer among those who are to be most benefited by
the death of the victim. Now, who was the party most to
be benefited by the death of the earl? Myself, his heir and
successor. My reflection upon these facts sealed my lips
on the subject of my nocturnal adventure. Fortunately, no
one had the slightest idea that I had anything to testify in
regard to that nights tragedy, and so o one called me at
the inquest. Nor, indeed, would my testimony, if given,
have thrown the least light on the mystery. I had been the
first to discover the murder-that was'rl."  .
As the earl finished speaking he .'tempted to take his
wife's hand; but she withdrew it gely, "saying, with a
sigh:                              .
"For all that, I wish you had roud the household when
you first made the discovery."    . ,            .
' . .  '  .
CHAPTER v'I
LOVERS A"ND W WS
AFTm all, the reconciliation beee  the husband and
wife was but a superficial one.
She assented to every measure he proposed, but in a cool
and indifferent manner. She agreed t return 'with him to
Hawkewood Hall, to live in retirement, which her own
physical condition, no less than the very recent decease of
her parents, rendered necessary and proper-until the meet-
ing of Parliament should summon the earl to London,
when, if all should be well with her, they would go for the
season to their town house in Piccadilly.



<pb n="61"/>
A TORTURED HEART                       61
Outwardly the countess was civil and even kind to the
earl But inwardly she was still full of distrust and un-
easiness.
Within the last three months she had gone through an
experience that might have unsettled the intellect of a
much stronger-minded woman than Volante, Lady Hawke-
wood.
She had discovered what appeared to her to be positive
proof that her husband had been the assassin of his cousin
and predecessor, the late earl, and simultaneously with this
discovery she had inevitably taken a horrible antipathy to
him, and with the terrible secret in her heart she had with-
drawn herself from his society, without giving any reason
for doing so.
In truth, she could not have explained her conduct; it
was awful to think of, it was impossible to speak of, the
atrocious crime of which she had been led to believe him
guilty.
The suppressed anguish of this secret must finally have
killed or crazed the countess, had she not, in a moment of
exasperation, been goaded into "arraigning" the earl, at her
own tribunal, and charging him with the murder.
To her utter amawempnt, he had completely vindicated
himself from the charge.
But all the relief the countesswould otherwise have felt
in his vindication was destroyed by the great passion of
shame and sorrow into which she fell on finding out how
deeply, cruelly, unpardonably she had wronged him by
that atrocious suspicionl
So deep was her penitence and humility that she would
have atoned for her fault by any means in her power.
The earl had gone to his cousin's room on the night of
the murder to procure something to relieve his pain in an
acute attack of illness. And she, having seen him at the
door of the victim's chamber, looking pale and agitated, had
suspected him of the murder I Did ever wife so deeply, so
madly wrong her husband? What could she do to atone for
so heavy an injury ?
These were the painful thoughts that filled the mind of
the countess and prevented her from feeling the unalloyed
pleasure she would otherwise have enjoyed in the knowledge
of the earl's innocence.



<pb n="62"/>
A TOiRTUTBD HEARTB
But tfe ie came a rattlion from  this state. Whlea, in
the ooirse  f hbis narrative of that fatal nights  roceed-
uing  Iprd Hawekewood made the startling revelatio  iat
he, himself, had first discovered the murder, and discoeried
it several hurs before it was itno   to anyone else in the
ous$e, and yet 'ad not give tfie alarm at the time, nor
even made any diselomre at the coroner's inquest, the
counteis disturbed mind 'wa invaded by new causes of
doubt and perplexity.
Why, in the name of     f   .ttice and mercy, had he not
roused the household imimediately upon the discovery of
the murder, as any other mian, wman, or child would have
done, under the crcumstan e.'
He ascribed his inactijd; o toht ocaion to the paralys
ing efect of illness and 'ho ;'.:
But the earl, as she knw" ,wa, " .o oward. Why, then,
had he sufered himelf tio .          either by pain or
panic at such a time?     :    . 
What had been in his ea   ; :'!.,  .
What was on his conit        ';
She put these questioMi            :he, had bitterly
wronged him once. She woil ,  t>     aih  by the faint-
eat thought. She put these:  3't*^iom he.
But they returned aga  ,t,       thera that arose.
T'he earl had acted iw lat       'e the mbot mag-
nanimous spirit totad his                H e had freely
pardoned the deep wrog lhea            by her dea
Ouspueione.    ' "   , ',.'"        '. 'by hr,,
Now, how could a man    he.    ti      was ietid of
guilt" have so easily co nedib  ^ ;     9    . 'guy  ;
Why should he have      "doi                "~ 
What was o   his con'si....      : '
Not actual crime. nTat  ih'         now belie.,
But intention P               ,?
She could not drive these 'a      way. They     add
return. But she was resolvid  e Qui  not act upon them.
They would not govern her conda, ' ,
Since her husband was prorv't  e e been entirely guilt-
less of his cousin's death, she would do all she'  old to
atone for the grievous injury she had done by upecting
him of that crime.
So she agreed to every mealie he proposed  n, as a



<pb n="63"/>
A 7TOBZTED HTPART                    eS
preliinary step, shbegan        e b  preparation fo their
return to Hawkevood Hall, which was to take pshe mune-
diately after the marriage of Cosmo Bel s ble and Isolime
Irvine.
Lord Hawkewood really seemed to rejoice in his recncil
iation with his wife, and sought to please her in every way
It was fram him that the proposal came that Lady Victoria
Belle Isle should accompany, the countess to Hakewood
Hall, and remain there as her sisters guest and companion
as long as should be mutually. ageeable to them.
This plan seemed really so goo  nd wise an arrrngment
for all parties that it was promptly adopted
The wedding day dawned--as lovely a day as ever formed
an 4xception at an unlovely season in an unlovely climate.
At a very early hour the household of Castle Belle Isle
was astir.
The ladies and gentlepn oP the fanmily--lU young
people now, it will be remembered-breakfasted together,
as upon any other day, and thae began to prepare for the
ceremony.
In honor of the memory of the late duke and duehess the
marriage was to be a strctly private one-none but the
nearest relatives were to be present as witnesse--but the
family mourning was to be modified for that occasion onnly.
The bride was to be attired in her traveling suit of dark-
ray poplin, and the young bridesmaids were to be dressed
n darklgay silks with black trimmings.
There was not even to be a wedding breakfast, for the
ceremony was to be quietly performed at the parih church
at Hawkeville, and at its cenclueion the newly married
pair were to drive directlyto t he railway station end take
the train for Portsmouth, where the lieutenant's reiment
was getting ready for embarkation.
Isoline was up as early as were any of her companions.
Mrsm Greylock, the oldest lady's maid in the castle, was
eoon i, attendance.
She was ordered to dres the bride, a duty a agreeable to
her in her sixtieth yearas ever it cold have been to a
bridesmd of sixteen.
The wedding dress-a traveling suit of dark-gray Irish
poplin, had been selected by Lady Hawkewood as a color
and sye peculiarly becming to the rich brunette beauty



<pb n="64"/>
8641         A TOrTUED BEART
of the bride-lay spread over a large chair. A gray cloth
sacque, trimmed with silver-fox fur, and a gray felt hat,
with a silver-gray marabout tuft, and a pair of dainty white
kid gloves-to be exchangeo after the ceremony for gray
ones, for the journey-lay upon the bed.
Isoline was seated on a low chair before the tall dressing
glass, submitting her beautiful head to the tender mereies
of Mrs.. Greylock, who, in addition to her other high quali-
fications of a lady's maid, possessed "eminent" talent for
hairdressing.
She was engaged in "frizzing" the front locks in the
most approved style, a la Skye terrier, when the door was
opened by the housekeeper, who tqietly admitted,a young
woman and withdrew.
The newcomer was Lona Pond, who in honor of her
mistress' marriage, had, for on e .' changed   her black
bombazine dress for a gray caaher suit.
"We are all the color of rainy. a," muttered Mrs.
Greylock, disapprovingly, as she la    at the girl's cos-
tume.                     '    . 
Lona Pond did not heed, or hear, b  weft quickly up to
her mistress and courtesied.  :  '' :
"You are punctual, Lona. :But.4 ayou BFuite sure that
you are willing to leave country itid ia pnds to go with me
to the other end of the worldl.,' af  iave any regrets,
child, there is still time to with a   Miss Irvine.
"I have no friends in this cot.~C.ma'am. I leave a
few acquaintances, to go with b i.ir.   friend and dear
mistress. I hope you are stifi      take me, maam,"
respectfully answered the girl. ;'  '          ' ""
"I am more than satisfied. l-aai 'y glad to have you,
since you are so willing to g. with:ilf; It will be a great
comfort to me, Lona, to have 'hi.t1. e attendant of my
childhood with me in that diitani land, where all are
strangers," said the young lady: wi: frank kindness. 
"And, indeed, I will study to 4;o  my duty by you,
ma'am, as faithfully now as ever I did in the old tme,"
said Lona.
"Well, then," put in Mrs. Greylock, with the fredom
of an esteemed old servant, "you had better stop talking
and begin doing. You could make yourself useful and save
tine now by putting on your young lady's shoes and stocks



<pb n="65"/>
A TOR'TUIJi. 13TAR                     65
ingL   There they are, rolled up in that tise paper on the
foot of the bed," said Mr. Greylock shortly.
Lona instantly obeyed, got the paroels and knelt down
at the feet of her mistress and began .to change the little
velvet slippers for the fine white silk hose and the soft black
kid boots.
With two pairs of hands at work on her the little bride
was soon dressed, even to the last item, the long, silver-gray
scarf veil of fine gauze that was tied around her hat and
draped about her sacque.
"Now, stand up, dear ma'am, and view the effect," said
the well-satisfied lady's maid, whea her task was fnished.
Isoline stood up before the tall glass in whih her form
at full length was seen.
The mirror-in its time-had reflected more ngnificent
brides of the house of Belle Isle, in all the splendor of
trained white satin and velvet dresses, point-ae veils,
orange-flower wreaths, and diamond jewelry, but never ha4
it. reflected a more beautiful bride than Isoline Irvine in
her pretty, simple costume of shaded gray.
"A quiet little partridge after the swans" muttered Mrs
Greylock, appreciatively, while mentally contrstiW g the
present with the past.
"Now, my dear, how do you like yourself?" she inquired
of the young lady.
"I like your work very much, Mrs. Greylok, thank you,"
replied Mis Irvine.
"I am happy you do, my dear. Now sit down and rest
until you are called for. Take all the rest you can, for
you will have a tiresome day of it," continued Mrs. Grey-
lock, as she gently PUt the bride back into her chair.
Miss Irvine smiled, reached for a parcel that lay un-
opened on the dressing table, and place it in the hands of
the woman, saying:
"Here, Mrs. Greylock, is a keepsake that I wish to leave
with you.
"Oh, thank you so much for thinking of me, ma'am,"
replied the woman, with a courtesy, as she began to unwrap
the parcel.
It contained a handsomely bound prayer book in large,
clear print; and also a pair of gold-rmmed spectacles in a
fine morocco case.



<pb n="66"/>
'' :
4: .
( ' ' "; ,( ..i
i   I
r".
!:'i
4 .1*'. ;!:I' t \;i : -
I        '                                                         ;tii              t;f;ll bt
51 1:
1 ;I1E ;, ' I
tLt
.r,
'i r
'1' i..,
:'..  ' ', r
"f  :
.                                                              r
i:ici: J.;;; ., i:: :.'':'i
,i , "'1' :ic.;Jr;;l.
L.:IL !'                                                                        jlP.
'' I ,
51 '!r
I'
'': ' I bi iL;
),3$i
: 
 I
r r ., arr.plRa*. ar ,;,
(:
Ir j;$ :
i :X1
I
,...
.d'
;1
r
r!1; ; ; 'I
1;5 ` i, ..
a i-i ' .ure (.
::
''j;
',4:1                                                             ''
j'  4't''
I''` r'''' : c:
i
I
u,
ihq5
i2. cii
liI :
I:
JIcr ,,
r :;
I :rI.!'r i .,r: i, .
'r,
 i r *C' 
'' i71
; ',\ 1
:
. :I,' i:' \'Pj
' '
i'! i / i:
Li  :
':
r,l  . W:jYrPW'"'"~""~c'."""P-r C
E .. .
blC).latb i
.* r;" ePd:
.'i \ -i; :rr 
:  ' '
. ,
:kaiad' 

; 1
. ;:

 I  7nun
r
d '.q '' 'Y pii
to urdi'i
,. 1
t4;iia.iisa:fBB iiit ii
Ir,
'''
.i ;r 6i.rl i 1
 .,
"`
-t'' .i ;.
r. ''' I
i : i: I
 ,: ,,



<pb n="67"/>
  '
.I '  .1
.:r !
; i ''
i.I
Irr '
''' ': '' ; ' 
;j
1. 1: LL ''
ROQIIS .B Wld. 4511 IISPLQ i5 I
'i " i:
'I
r; jii  '
7 i:
I, 
Zp , It\T i
BLiik  ' '             r                                          ;
r  ,
r[11
I
I? skb
C:'ct                    iidrr'' '
R1W ; '' I"v
tiji
!,;7 d,! ': 4:  
1, i: r'
.eBiI ISP.
;r:
I, :e . ;
F:'`; . i
91k s :. s :
I. ;it,
'CI ' 1irreppbae.: ,:,
:
s:eo;
Ir
066bi;  ,,
;;.;: ::
Mii
:!.  '' ii                      r4
1
I
 itil ' '
:
 L
.19j  it
1 .
)! r.B
t r c'czii' !ilW
'' ''
' U
1. ' '
i':
" ' .\rl `,il
*L9. :i (II
,'i
9            r. .
]I It :Swr .,
: ' '
,r 'r'  ' :
o, ,
r f'; :Tqirfi: a;c
i
r '.''
r!.-:::.!.]i ,:r. L"C i :lk
i c .,,, :  r
Irb ,: ,; h4lsi  I
oaii
I'
abp9P;i4 ..   
i i
dsi
! , !1
'i .I
i. 4.;. -L IL . 1
1 r II.Sdf::ld fiS   I 
'' ,BW
 fbs crbl:4rtarcic;,
ii. :.
jooi ooaortirs,:141i
9 1
ifil Iscners, .)
no i fn,  . 
..,.
icrom' ub'Putae49ai; i 1
, ..  ,  .I
( .',
: :I '
'' '
`'' '



<pb n="68"/>
Thongh the news of the 'pprac<inE 3narriage bad .gon
abroad it was well pderto.    othn the estate and in
th.,      th. t any deirt.tion     the par of the te-
any orllge      would be oiwdered iiprooper nde the
cie"route es of the recent deeae of the late Due a nd
Dbuch8s   of Grand Manors. 
hey      e on quietly to the     roed on the great
fiat boat, and drove though te village directly to the
c.rch        , ...      .  ,        :,..
It might have been .ady  i di^w ride, for any crowd o
spectators that cud be e.          .        , ' . 
In the chuchyar, ho            w   a aB  s sore, oh
dlers, among whom were the        e three-thubiqui-
tous PeTree and PM'r ':        ,   -
Tbe church dopos  d b  iM      teep ubt the curi-
ou0 1 owd; but they wair i            4lu.t the 'bridal
the, wee.    h                           ' 
the bridegroom, aoorge ti4^R<i^        HwOwo
The two r*i dre, the  tt;                and Oar
lotte, wer the sixth. 
On. bearhing the haed ti   a      :i broke.
tprd    &w   ood led                 altar r.il~gi,
where he lkneled upo the       'i(i
The bri(eiroomyith a                   awkq's
arm and zinet down on the   .     bide.
brid    i e. he                     Mnors
'Around these centraSl  ure  wr   g   ped      other
/i/ebers of the party.



<pb n="69"/>
A ''htjU3i)          A              w
The R ev. Dr. Vinenet, min i ,c*nmnnlc  Otd, i btok in
hand, m-font of the reading da k.
On his ' .rgt, the Rev. M.r. Br.vere, the ~f iwdamy,
ciate, who happened to be ox a viit to the neighbor-
hood.                                       ' 
On his left, the parih  rk, Peer   rr, who sa so
gfett n 'rei po  h that hi ws 'apt to rcl" them . fort out
of p'a,    n in the  ar'iage eeremo. 
The 'tes bepn with the ameal solemn   hettion and
praeo , i hp oeeded .in the muuii way. 
Durng i      s pro e a few peIple Were  bse d to steal
aquietlyr  .dip"0o b ser and Ioater thenelve sea ong the
One :!"jlendfi  gaceful woman In deep DmurGIdn  noiae-
1h et of th aae a       htar ,  e~ ae, beii t  deepest dhde,
could yet have a clear viei of te bidal a, frm whi,
bythe pobitio. of her held     ever eemed to 'remor e
he     ,         s her gaithia erlack cre veSilwa doin,
nohing coold'bis ditinctly seen of her taei .
When the ceremony was concluded with the iolemn
"I pronounce you man and wie. T  whee  hm tGod hat
joiiaed tghsr  t iot smani puir ,ude,-the brfdegroom
and the bride aroam froim their kee" and received the comn
gratnltionei   of their frndia     ' 
Then the rcor le    o ii   vt, and; etered it
by the dor tht opened  n the left of the chridetl
The bridal party followe to rister t  mariage.
In pasaing on, fhlie went comp beside the corner pew
in which the ao;litar wy in in mourning sat in the shaae.
The latter leFt her  ai ad  ame dloser to t  passig
bride,  d   at her for a oti   hrough th thic foldE
of her     crap. #eel,       opened the pew dooi and
came out nd mingled      th the people who were leaving
the church.        '
This   idnt pad o wiftly and silently that no one
noticedit except the biide.
But the efect of the encouiter upon her wa startling.
For a moment she stopped short, ra if uuddeuly stricken
with paralysis.



<pb n="70"/>
. ;r: ;-\i:I' r
'
:' i I:
$ !lr ;il:: 4
..
''?
::h .i :I
1. . 'i
::: . :I  , ,
P I;  41
:::;:iarr LIL:IIYI;Ynr-  .
;;;
:i I: 'O r. ii 
 biir(
L:i. *
\ r :I
i i ,
i) ' 'i II L '
IcE 
I
 . 1  ,I U;iRiirLJ:dPh, \II
i . i
Ir, I ( r. -
I L1: r
r r
7iV I .
;.
,,
;
i .. 
;L.:.l ?
$,,
5'\
r!dl II;
?r
:s
r ri ,
.d, C! ijdl ,,, ,
I
:!:: ; : r  r
 r.                  :i                                                      '"'' 'li      '   I
i:;i.
7 , ,
!:
:i i::9  
:c;;: c Y .( I
i  
r. I,Y,. i !..'3;ot ,, ": 3rl.( ,. .
I .'I? ijll .I: \
ii:
rli
I I;
[:is                                 FI:                                                ;e
(I; F:
;:r
:.::. idi
I .,
6, ' I 'I'1;? , .1.
, .
J
;?;
,; ..... liioit
f i':
'.,, .y
LEC
'' )'
rlpp- ?i!:?
;. :  c;;Ti
`i'
s
at , ;r'
'al                         r                                                              .Xllaa Ir
t:uy '
gS#a! ? c: i                                                            7  Z
it 't 
.I
i:jr i).
1 1 E.
r
 ,.i' !
r "
;'''C
r,.: : , ,  ,., I II i:.
.. , r
.\. ii 1 r I. .ih
i;(l ?. 'i



<pb n="71"/>
A  TOr'"^u    J          . ,t*
twice efore seea. We .l have her loked iB and I will
write to you from . Blewhod Hall, ind tel l y-o al about
her. Do not be .ightened at your own imagin"iga l
"Mrs. *Bele ,tle; your hgniature is wanted h^er" said Dr.
Vincent pMitely. 
And Jol, '   pale aid trembli, went u p to he table
and aigned ieame to the regiter.
Thioe lwho witnesed ier agitation as.ibe   it to the
natural nervousne s of a bride, but thught it excessive,
even for tiht cause.      ,       r.. 
The witesie now addad their 'iga  tur  to the record,
and the ihblee party, afte~ taing leave of the clergyne,
iled out ;' the vetr  and returned     t her oarrnige# to
drive to the railway statioin.
There was the usual change t~at tslea place in the
proaliAbi after the mariage ceremnxony.
'The bidegrom handed the bride into hi own earriege.
The Earl and Countess of Hiwkewood, the Duke of
Grand Manore, and Lady Victoria Belle Isle, occupied the
seond carriage and all the other members of the party
crowded:.themeles into the capaiousg break, and so the
three vehiclea prioeded 'to the railway' tation. ' 
Here the final adieux were to be made.
But they were just half a mnute too late. The train
had tarted, and was steaming out of sight atheir carriages
drw upin front of the building.
They had, therefore an hour t. wait for the next one.
They a went into the ladie' parlor, which, at this time, 
was quie dafted, as it we aps t o be after the dpatture
of a train. 
For a wy station, the rom was very well furnihed and
very dlean., 
Our party drew seats togeer and. sat down, not so
much disappointed .as most people are at haing 'missed
their train. They wre not il-pleaed to be rpriered rom
separatiln and to have one more preoious. our of each
other's eompany before parting for so long and o indefinite
a  timb..   * *,     , 
Thi 'laat hour was filled with last word,.
Whi.e they oat thus, together, Lona Pond came in from
the seccd-class waiting room anc informed her mistress
that'ehe' ha  arrived in the van with the luggage fro



<pb n="72"/>
O            A .TORTURBD 'THERT
Castle Belle Isle in time for the fist train, and had  oe
into the second-lass waiting room, not knowing by wThih
class her mistress would wish to.travel. When she saw the
carriages arrive she came into the first-class waiting, room
to report to her mistress.
'Quite right, Lona. You are to go in the same carriage
with ,s," paid Mrs. Belle Isle. 
"Who is looking after that luggage?" inquired Lieut.
Belle Isle, ising to leave the room,
"CStop here, Cosmo. It i ll right. I ordered Stepaey
to attend to it," said Lord iawkeiood.
The young lieutenant bowed his thanks and sank into
his seat.                   "' *
The Duke of Grand Manors, who had lingered outside
to buy a copy of that mornings Tmes, which had just come
down from London, and ws for *ale on the news counter,
now came in with the pape  n hi band, eTclimivig:
"Oh, I say, Belle Isle, :d you kn.   the honors in store
for  you?"       ** .   -    ;P  ''', . 
'I do not know what you mex.-  I know the honors I
enjoy," replied the brideroo' , T  y fond, proud look at
his new bride.. *'                 ' 
"Oh, yes, of course. But :do     ~'-Iow who you are
goin to takeout in youtr  pni".; i.* , 
"Our regiment s goig,    mit I     any othera" 
.Well, then, fliten to  :1t:h W :*     it," said th
duke. And he read as follows:  1; ' 
"]MATrI  orIL  An  OM pri     The marriage of Bel-
mont, Viscount Seyres, with Mar   da'ughter of the late
Rev. James Smith, and gind< i      t heiress of he late
Maria, Princes Zavieski, is ted:Dr the 28th instant.
"The viscount has been ecoGn:'ipointed Governor of
Tasmania, and will sail, with hia nde and their suit, on
the Australsian, which leae Pcortmouth on the-fst of
December, proximio. The cabi : ,  t*he government ahip
have been fitted up in elega~it etyle or the acowomalntou
of the new governor and his pa:y." 
"There I what do you think of tht? Why, Como, you
and Mrm Belle Isle will not only have the honor of the
governor's company, but the delight od the woman's who,



<pb n="73"/>
' A T   TURfED HEARTT-               7R
by reraining from matrimony during the life of her aunt,
deprived yourself of the inheritance of the largest priate
fortune in the  ritish empire. Now then I"
All the ompahy were stuck dumb with amaement ex-
cept Liut. Bele Isle, who laughed and said:
"I am glad they are going in our ship. I have some
curiosity to see the beautful woman who could withstand
all overtures to matrimony until she had secured this im-
mense fortune, and then in her mature age take up with an
old nobleman of feeble health-and impecunious condition!
As for the fortune, as far aa I am  onened, I am willing
she sould have it  I have all the wealth I covet in thi
world," he added, taking the hand of his bride and presing
it to his lips.
The' arning whistle of a coming train was heard, and
the voice of the porter arose, crng out:
"Passengers for Portmouth 1"
Our party arose in haote  Trains donot wait for tender,
lingering adieux. Steam has no sentiment of its own, and
no consideration for other people's
Hasty, earnest good-ye were exchanged. Children were
kissed in such a hurry that the salute was more like an
assault than a caress.
And almost before the little bride.could colleet her sat-
tered huta ties she found herself seated in a firftass rail-
way carriage, with her husban  beside her, and her maid
before her, being whirled onward at the rate of sixty miles
an hour.
CHAPTER VIII
"TBBU DUAD ALIVB'
TfiB    was no one else i      the oompr ent, and the
bridegroom would gladly have dpensedwith theompany
of ti lady's maid, s that he migt have enjoyed a tt--
tae joirey with his bride. But by no word r look did he
expres this feeling. He was much too re   and amiable
to criticise any arrangement mnade by her.
By some fine sympathy she discovered his hidden an-
noyance, and bending toward him, said in a low tone:



<pb n="74"/>
74           A `WOfTU dEL         7RA!I
"X lave, Loa' Poad in here wii' ts, because whatever
she may be in years, she is but a child in intellect, ad.-not.
to be tr.uted to travel alone in a seoond-clas carriage. TYon
do not mind, deari do you?",
"     Oh , n ot at all," returned Oaeme, who thereupon .re
solved that he would "not' mind".any arrangement his
"angel' m$iht be pleased to ,make .that happy day.
Lona Pond had not heairdonoe wod of the conversation of
which she had been the ubje  ,      .
natinctively feeling that she was an intruder upon a
bridali $fe-ttte, natiSta    b  ,that she was there by
her mistress' direction, the. g i  m: ;seated herself as far
away from the newly married P  r the limited dimensions
of the compartmept would       i hid shrunk into her
corner, made herself as             ni   nt a poible,
and peistently looked oi    theie 'window beside her
on the expanse of the sea, lesidt"   i e railroad ran for
many a mile.           .* '      .'' 
.It was a short, swift, ai4 4    4 
After a ride of five hut du
at Portsmouth, where l   ,^               roem at the
fountain .Hotel 
It wanted a week noi t i  e               E
The day succeeding thi     i   .drt      nt e ent   to
"ort, at the headquarter':li I:
After whih all the tim   '  fot on daty at
the baracs, he devoted to'3&i
lie took her out waking,            i    ever'y inmor
ing to see all that waa                        and "it
envirns, and every even    to if ausemet;
all of which was very novea  4   i      to the comnty-
bred.ri.      ,                             e 'o t t
The ladies 6b the regimen t'^i    e.oe was to depend
for society in that far-off, bat t,           for so mnny
years to. me-all called a;          hen they did not
find her in-which happenea                , as he 
abroad so mTuch--the:y  t   d^        d mesge
She exehanged frei     det             y Hawl]wood
and Lady Victoria Be bs              iiom were'th  a at
Hawkewood Hall.                 1
TBit she got no sati actory new    in        to the
strange woman in mourning who           gh      her so



<pb n="75"/>
A ' iV^i           IERT              t
A .
muchb.     uh   a woi;ma if Ehe had ever existed in the fesh
-had never been seen in the illage or its'viciniy.
Al this walkin, riing, driving, aight-seeing, letter
wrting, and receiving and paying visits, filed up every
hour of #eery day and caused the week to pass rapidly awy.
On the last day before the sailing of te shipMr. Belle
Isle took his bride down on boar4 the Australasan.
The simpl*e eountry girl had never before in her life seen
a great sh, except t a distance, and he was filled with
wonder 'id  delight at the vastnes of hulk, decks, masts,
sails, nd all its paraphernalia of sgeamanship, and with
the Btntew e and comfort of its accmomoaations for pa-
sengea                .'      . 
She ta   favored with a sight d the cabin and state-
rooms that had been fitted up for the exaluive use of the
new governor.and his party, and which in its elegance and
luxury, all on a small cale, reminded herof a miniat
suite of palatial apartments.
Finally she saw ber.own little stateroom in the fore 
cabin, crmtped, dole,; but elea.
"Well, Cosmo, this grand Austelasi   is, after all, the
finest sight I have ever seen in Potsmouth or Portsmouth
harbor," she sid, with enthnasisn, as they were leaving the
ship.
" Wel, you will have a vy  good opportunity of becom-
ing intmately' acqainted With 'he great creature  You
in be in her company for the net four months,at least.
How dO you thnk you will like that?" laughed te lieu-
tenant, 
"I sha  like it very much,, indeed."
"I hope you wil not .be seaiCek."
"I hope not I Pray do not uget such a thing " laugid'
Isoline.
The next, day.the day of the embarkation of the regi-
ment nd the sailing of the ahip-was a gala day in the
town.
Early in the morning, Lient. Belle Ile took his wife
and th* maid on board the Astralaian, saw them safe in
their qiarters and left them there to return to his duty
in the barracks.
The other ladies of the regiment were also on board.
At no   that day the regiment, in foil dres uniform,



<pb n="76"/>
76           A TOR           )    ART
nmarched from their banrack# to'theaihp with fying flags
and beating drms, and all the town ttned out to see
them.
An honr after the governor and his siut came on board,
and were received by the soldiers and marines under arms
and a salute of artillery.
The ladies in the.fore aahi~  owded up the companion
way to see the new governor "ad his bride, as they passed
down the deck between the piesented arms of the soldiers
and marines.              . ,:;  ' 
They saw that he was a i     .bend owne, old man, with
casic -features  a freh oleo,, piercing blue eyes,
under heavy eyebrows   tt hted their luster, and
iro~n.g[y hair and m uetta h '  ;:
Wf~hy, he is a  ed  d od Betnx I" whiw     ered the
surgeon's wife. ":e doe n      k   cky at al They
said he was infirm  We. might fenown that ias not
true, for if it had been, he.ie       haiid have been ap-
pointed governor of ~wtr,   " "" ,
The oher ladies agreed w  l      pi   nion   of the
v isc o u n t.              /     . .  ' ,  ; ;
But of his new wi tfe  t             ,eiot aellable to judge.
They saw a tall,      e sij '        !o, hanging
on his arm. She wore * in    i^t        suit, t
deeply with silver-fok fur, a ; " t:id feather and
a nav"line gauze eil that               nd neat black
glovei, and carried a rich c  i.l her arm.
She passed by, on. her hi            ithout any of
the ladies having got a giS 
But why did' eolf ise e le           shiver, and put
her hand to her heart, and "          her breath:
"Am:   going mad? OGret"ij            I going mad?
Why do I see my dead moti        '  fom under every
disguise  Her livng face shiho  forti under that dark
veilP Madl Yes,     fear--t :fe    t   am going mad
indeedl ", ;
She followed the ladies do*ni .ft'ie cabin and entered
the little stateroom thathaa' beena appropriated to her use,
and where she found he  aid er  eng .din unpacking valises
and dressing cases, and "puttig th    to -rights, t :she
eradBed it.          .
Lona, did youn eee the-new gtweri's    lady as she



<pb n="77"/>
A TORTUME HEART                       TI
passed?" she inquired, as he sat down on the short ofa
opposite her berth.
"No, ma'am, I did not  I was at the foot of the ladder,
and only got a glimpse of her bahnoralB bot and blue
skirts," answered the grl, looking p from the bag she
was unpacking.
Isoline dropped, her head upon her hand' nd sank into
deep thought.
She coild do Uothing else. She could not settle herself
to any occupation.
By the bitle overhead she knew that the ship was get-
ting under way.                             . .
oo   ihe heard the  gnal gun ired, and she knew the
ship was off.
She felt the vat hulk, upon which she herself was but an
insignifecant little speck, swing heavily, heavily round and
bead for the open sea. . .
She beard   e voice ofher opaions, as they pased
by her stateroom door, talking of goingup on deek to see
thelast of the" old country."
She felt a desire tojoin them andlook once more upon
the receding shores of ,glnl  which she might never see
agal#.
She went ot and silently dipped her arm through that
of the'. rgen'. wife and ascended with her to the upper
dect. 
The deck was not crowded,, as it might have beei sup*
posed to be at the hour of sailing.
-The soldiers, sailors, and marines were all at their quar-
ters or posts f duty. Their, oiers were with them.
On deck, therefore, only remained the msa at the wheel,
the officer of the watch, and the ladies of the regiment who
had just come up..
The ship was bearing wtly out to sea witthe tide,
under full sail, before a stiff breeze.
The shore waa already receding.
Leving her companion, Isoline went ad leaned over
the buiarks, and fixe her eyes upon the fading land, de-
termined to see the-last of it.
She gazed like one in a dream, until she was suddenly
awakened by a thrill.that shook her thol fre. 



<pb n="78"/>
(                        i~~~~~ier,10A , N ,
il;                 ' .~~~~ter   4  e'
I ~~~~~~ .~~~~~iise
~~,
be ('
.~I . :?.   ,Sp~L~eS ~  leebin~a::is
aid~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1. :." ~   ~          ;bbis&looqr



<pb n="79"/>
' ' '  ' ?', I' '  ' . .. ' '  ''' '."'  '  '  '  . '  ,' ' ''  
-  F  . '*  'if <*'':(^; ^'"'a  ' *, .
* an-' s iqe' ' .i t  * * , ;**  * >  *  :'  ; .; ,..)  - ', ', i ,  ;
'm 4t, I ieeret &n* )ww (4  3 Iroved ra til
w  st rnberemty'<houI& i  Iat* be r
.  ...  ;,.* .  ', /~ '  ..;. ..I  . ' .  .. . .  ,  , 
t9N* ,vV,  0% ;             ;
flt) aiiqSZ p  **?if   Kit
/*l  hoit vl~el 2 or  .*hi  * *e 1  .h a
MIcxiex1niii  i.wa  hem-.sXt$4
. I.fth e  tilutt" i s rf  ''l  ,b*  '.*i, '  . 
saerody responsIble for bf
? e,  and  ,a .. iv i.e4  .s; ,l' ^ 7 kis .  ;., ,
We ha Wrcey enscioti.  . '
4ed^ rting woman before her keriity 4h sad nindew '
*e.i  n. and eadeii,  4 dd t and h li.
A Ie          t,           .,,.e
;   o Wore. hier. U  md
ealiolA .eel~y, 1; 01ied   * . .:



<pb n="80"/>
80           A . TOR.tURD HEART
'14, my child, my child, you do not understand I But
I will explain.  I will tell you alL  Hear before ,you
judge, Isoine " she cried, claepin her hands in a desper-
atin of appeal which the girl, i her imperfect noledge
of the eirenietanees, could in no wise comprehend, and
* hich, instead of reassrig her mind, filled it with drker
doubts.
She looked up to her mother's face with an expreion
full of distress.
"Hear me before you judge me, my daughter I  Strike,
but hear '" said the lady, with a half-suppressed cry of
anguish. "'Strike, but heair r.? '
As if the entle Iaolizne coul have stricken her mother
either literally or metaphoril  
"Mammal" she umrmo-idm a voice full of wonder
and pity.
"Hush1" said the lady, in a low, fightened tone that
caused her daughter to turn her .ha!d and to see the Vis-
count Seyres slowly walkng .to     . then   .
Isoline arose from her lof  t, atpo   the rpe and
stood by her mother's hair;  .,;:... .r
As the viscount c~m  upithe  *ys fnace and manneranm-
derwent a complete.ainge   Rrit aS.ll her self-control
and peaking in a voie; of tored h.nws, she said, pre-
seting the viscoun to her o        ::i 
"I am happy to meet: yof.         e wife of Lieut.
Belle Isle, of the -- th  'ii.       '   r se. I mst con-
gratulate my lady. on her  a l^aecquisition for the
voyage," said his lordship, with,':  bow and with a cor-
dial, pleasant .mile.      , . . : 
Isoine, trembling eacessiv4i, b her head in acknowl-
edgment of his words, then -     , raised her soft, dark
eyes to her stepfather's faces-hle  p  he r I How strange
the idea to one who had never ee.n own a.father:! Her
stepfather, who wav all mconeo  .'wd the relatiowhip, be-
tween them!                  . 
She saw standing before hW ae tail, portly, martial-look-
ing man of some sixty year' of asg, with iron-gray Wair
crowning a noble head, withs a cler forehead, busy, iron-
gray eyebrows overhanging keen, bi~ghtlbhie eyes, an aqui-
line nose, an iron-gray mustache shading a wellformed
mouth and a smooth chin; in a word, a oonntenpnye from



<pb n="81"/>
A TOBR'iuKSU HEART'                    81
which beamed the truth and goodness which drew      all
around him who were not essentially evil into a sphere of
peace.
He saw her disturbance, and, attributing it only to the
bashfulness of a young bride, he smiled on her, and as he
smiled his keen, brightblue eyes softened into tenderness
Isoline felt her heart drawn out to love and trust him.
"Mrs. Belle Isle is a dear little love of mine, whom I
have known ever since she was a baby. And now I think
I must carry her off to my cabin to have a tMte--ttete. We
have so mueh to talk of since we saw each other last," said
Isoline's mother, with a composure that filled the girl with
wonder.
"What does mamma mean by all thisP" she asked her-
self. "Why does she not introduce me as her daughter to
my stepfather now? She will have to do it sooner or later;
why not now ? What part is mamma playing ?"
While Isoline was debating this subject in her mind, the
viscountess arose and took her husband's arm, and said: 
"You must see us to the door of the cabin, my lord;
for I am sure.we shall never be able to keep our feet on
this deck."
The ship, in fact, was now rolling heavily.
The viscount drew his wife's hand close to his side and
offered his other arm to Isoline, who took it gratefully and
clung to it tightly, for her feet were as unsteady on the
rolling deck as were her mother'  She observed that the
viscountes drew her veil closely over her face as they pawed
down.
Near the head of the companion way they met Lieut.
Belle Isle, who saluted the governor in military style as he
hurried past, without looking at the two ladies, or seeing
that his own wife was one of the two who hung upon the
viscounts arms.
But then it was dark just where they had met, and the
lieutenant was preoccupied and in a hurry.
Lord Seyres saw the ladies safely to the foot of the
companion stairs, left them there, and returned to the deck.
Lady Seyres led her daughter to the door of her own
stateroom, opened it with a small key that she took from
her pocket and led her in.
Then. when the door was closed and locked on the inside,



<pb n="82"/>
land *tm we a .W.tM togothar o     th    th*
;tutp~    iz~ee: azo,is NIOUp l l  d1~tr p~i$; dere
her ui a ciqan~brwie, ~ud~~pvq wP y to a brt toi asn4
ahpbe tfiit ;rhopic 'ber frame ue ;l enn tdabak~loiree a ~trc~ H er
egopQet~yg a4tup!s4 h da AtM who with
,,   nlo~tt~cie*,~~~ mothCse4  90t u!W~o   o
.f W        0~~t 'ubae j           Uh
4$~~~6ount-  ;~ ati4 oble
x Iib:~lth  ~ I m~mr~, e'~irImlake
"'Oh,IshI~bine! You 4a")~~grrtIrt  *I Yaoixtbe:htk~gowI
:Tb~~~isr'             my1~qebasri iod
''e ith joBy end",               1eaer me!
~int. aei62~e;~s~ LS:  ~ l~d~o   i~ctwhe iLame oh
t  t~kiisll~~tii~~~~~i \   ""  i~as~.".,toy, chrild 
~  kppooed ga'n f lad  : '                 if
t4~r~bav you by
t6 him e,-~ uhrrg~i~j~l:~   th4~sa1 have
~~~baut~~~~~~y watb ~ ~ ~ ~    ta
~t  l: a~  m      e'h~ t~i  '   laa that irSilPte.1J
bn 4it:Qb uots ezlighten~ t*~C f''ar-b1%:;e ai
4       ~ld$ ~iiaaur4         ieu.      ia ~~
thepmttem
dra~i 
h ;f) ari0      'med in rth smith of
oan rems.har            I ~Iw~y. a r .,a 'Io
my  indey0' Mi      Innhn-l*1          ae
framed In with v  black bii  iwb ekeru . gembexo
bia finmeral, wi$ W  D                    Our
'bMack bock., that piea~eE ni* Vt
t14* iaebeinga in mou rning."



<pb n="83"/>
"I   vry   at1  ,5thf~ whol e  owL le*t
8to~q~,  ,  *er y % rer,1~  thegiltegs t~o
Oh.bi 1w   whd4
CP~#yo~wue ihe~et*ah rn .3d
the,     I-C
,.grpr     Pead' ,.6erz3~, . fth w   b
Of it:: f'0r~fe~O 
-S~~-- grl.t
Jb~8q ~a~p~asei ti ;bjbm far134U On.
"W  th  Z  trad *U"abthe
nagtt ,  d obeur
tnd'hipankie reap,
0sou        Tbtwa,*
"I 4o     aqtonpna   1ere d i~i toe roap.
papu~q Opte eiLt Ti  W  *O RSYBt QSU). S"~c
sino hc s1ae oupao o it Bua



<pb n="84"/>
84           A TORTURED HEART
Once in the night, on the terrace at Castle Belsle Ise and
once at sunset, looking in at the library window."
"Yes, I was there. Oh, Isoline I haunting the neighbor-
hood to get a sight of my child before leaving the country
forever I"
.But no one, it seems, saw you but myself, mamma I And
when I spoke of having semm you everyone believed me
to be the subject of an optical illusion,"
"And you, child?"
"I thought you were a spirit I What else could I think?
I then, for the first time, believed in the reappearance of
departed spirits! What else could I believe? How was
it, mamma, that no one recogid you?"
"Simply because no one epected to see me, and I kept
my veil down always except when looking out from solitary
and safe points of view for you; and never entering a house,
or walking on a public road, whilin the neighborhood."
"But where did you sleep and eat, mamma?"
"In Penzance, where I was i Jiknown.
"And you made that long i   ney to ahd fro, on one
day, on each occasion when yoa  e to see me?"
"Yes"
"Poor mamma."           .    . 
"But, Ieoline, to return; t. oi  b bec-your reminis.
ner. You have seldom. heard   i    ak of my girlhood,
but you surely knew my maiden rpae."
"Oh, ye, mmmas, lna your             W- was Smith, I
anaow."                    ;U}'  * '
"A very common   n      e      net   name in EBug.
landl And with some light            , the commooest
name in the world I How many, ths do you and I know,
Isline? '     '         '  , A" ' 1
"Oh, I could not tell you, 'i/ima?  There was Smith,
the laborer on the Hawkevlfle e~tei and Smith, the miner,
and Smith, the fisherman, a~d ;Prson Smith, and Dr.
Smith, and Lawyer Smith, and ,H  Smith, the great heir-
em whom the viscount was repoited to be engaged to, but
whom- "
Isoline paused and reddened.
"Whom I supplanted in his affetions, you were about
to say," interrupted the viscountess.
"Oh, no, mamma, I should never have said that."



<pb n="85"/>
A TORTURED IRART                      8
"WeUll y: thught it, however, and you were wrong.
I did not supplant Miss Smith in the viscount's favor."
Isoline looked up surprised, ,yet pleased. 
"Then there was no truth in the newspaper report that
he was engaged to the great heiress," she said.
"Yee,,thre was-perfect truth in it. He was not only
engaged t that lady, but he married her."
"How qoul'd that be, mamma? The viscount married
you. You are the viscountees," said Isolie, with a puzzled
look.  /   :
"Ye* I am the viscountess and I was Miss Smith," said
the lady,. in a low tone.
Isoline gazed at her mother in a stupor of amazement
for a noment, and then her face flushed deeply and her
eyes fell..
Her.mother, watching her, divined her thoughts.
"Foolish girl," she saidi "of what are you thinking? I
was Miss Smith, indeed; but then I was Miss Smith before
I married Arthur Irvine, your father."
"I misunderstood you, mamma. I have misunderstood,
or I have been misinformed about many matters. I have
been led to believe that 'Miss Smith' never married; that
her inheritance of the great Zavieski estate was made con-
ditional upon her remaining unmf  ied during the life-
time of the testator," said Isoline, gravely, for she could
not see how this lady could posibly coblame b less ut
of this dark affalr which looked so like-elony.
"Isola," said the viscountess, "you have told me, at my
eqest, all that you remembe of our joint livea  Now I
Wiil    psupleaent that by teling you all that I remember of
mine."
"If you please, mamma," said the girl, with a deep sigh.
CHAPTER X
A TIMPTED LI'E
"You know that I was the only chid of the late Rev.
James Smith, curate of St. Peter's Chuch, Lambeth, and
that I lost both my parents- in early childhood."



<pb n="86"/>
dijeniylvlj~ela                at   te ca"t of
to ~th~i ~t~iYBd iuy fiMrs .cI~oei~ jldJl~ day. I hiad z~ver gene
myi ~t~* kae~nd'i'rnt. J~t,  at Sirst azpdf   thai
Jeshot4l o nd m  Fira.s*e tl~~?alaae Zatee~i~l adme
~dnY5~ pti1ri on~i ss :aocqu.oi'it~pwa   ~ .~ii';L  .ocdsiri 'd~  my firsI:
li~~   vLCa~I~. 11t en:l   then anatedromant,
ueav b5Y~Rty ya~r* :Ift~'u~Y~:C6 d  ~nn the solitv7y m~g- 
WIT.,wm called', beat~fi 4 *4  days, olS, gad thie d-
tdte of trer4        5       ' or little' eixele, as
thdOrepnhs 4f o
t bgr OpW'ofi that i 9
~~~axry a* ~ ~ ~ ~~~bauy 
rincef ]a
:~3l~ie~~g~i ~10 iW .t as no
iThe wire                             ina CteY0
de    xharnt d fthet
~8he"T~a~wos as jea~ous  Iih'.w'e Was
rably said toh Me been likehi'er
:~.~f~~iir:'t;~ha'l~a ~   b:beaar  ce' this'
*firaie~o so0 much Im          1ioii   Soig
ait~ a1 ric~h get  4-  t        marrv a due,
nst ~it'~?e   Or even                   hdpereea /indeed  at hcpe
are liisprad by-~n:fehme,~-t~   'I willlss~stotb~tI
X[ola, I never biiirt lz utter these words,
but from all I knowofh         and all thot gbap-
penedjanbseq~itlt, I have 1'   se didhe de them,
,or otha todtheM- eaefteet.  '
"I         Mk sent bp  to a i h;',that, and brbtIt no
more to the Palace Zavies$ t6ind my holidas, which
were always psaledat th eol;
'I was edafited tobmi 9ors e8s.  At: thet`Re of
eighteen I gradnated.  hen mmegrandnnti~ te we
toher presmede for w iief vait.



<pb n="87"/>
"I tot and f   d t, e Pribces ZRviC i ooahs tp her
chair with that hparalyts of the feet from which she ae-
ferefd ft t   ;e waeSlinder o.her l  lif.
She t"       ' gave  amo to  i   the atae oa y pm -
etirn 'a  ptr!ehs. lShe wold haSe ,no la.'.   beggz . eshe
id, watisi for her money to euader on some ,.fortne
h       nn1tii^  p pobleriown  shouMl earn my bread by the
toiluof  r md^ and thie sweat o tr brat8i, and t  blood
of sm i.apew he had be    cped tr do in her outL
"Tl ^: .I    should remain nBiairiedno onestly abr
forit m ig Mtil her demiaeI hoald inherit he whole
bullca   irmense estat   Btt   Iaould marry during
her itiie    sousled not.inheit a bhili gad the entire
proppertj ino ld go. to the nphe of  te   Prince .exz-
" To Cop o Bels    y   ale f   aoWd,'? saiSdcola.
"Yea the only sitr of Prince Alsnde. m    arried ,
yormge brother of the Duke of Grand Manors, end Coemo
Bellere lewas their only eon. I did not mkow these pa-
tiolrs at that tine.  Iarned them afterwards, of coure.
Thu0 fthe .   lPrinos Zavieski thqugxt s;he ad given mO
fair wanning of wtht I miLght t   to loe in the event of
mamriag   ering heoer lifetime. Bat. ih 1 hat warning, lik
man  waing chaaome to late        I was lrea4y mar.
riedh.:  ,' ,,;  ;.'.  : ,   <.i,   .'..     ..
"Yo^   arnianal Yoa, then,   Ated  when yon  were
aempely o4 otf achool ' ilaed Iola.
"I Wastarred whuile I w    ill ; at ischool," replied the
lady.    wi tell you how it     bout      school was
kept by he ife of a ler   lma n in the north of Tinglnd
who kad no childre .of her oi I was the enly one amgt
he pupils who. w4 lf t att school during the holidays.
Her usbahnd, the Bev,. Joph Jepbeon--   .
"I remember hiwe  l enoh,   mammas,..
"Of oue      ya do, my dear. Well, he  ainte habit
of tking young men to read with him during the vaca-
tion    muong them was Arthur Irviem, ,; living in the
family  et these young men daily at mels, at prayers, and
at chiuri                          -,
"l cared for none of them but Arthur Irvine. You re-
member your father only on his sick bed, Isla. You can-
not know how handsome and attractive he was when I first



<pb n="88"/>
met hinm his er   t youth. I, aso, was Wid to Bbeauti
fUl, exceedigly, in those dafs  We made acquaintance
and formedan ,tt hment. to eso other. I must be bie
. hie   One da y.about a month afte we fist met, we walked
of .and toolk a sain to Scotland, and got married and re*
tured befor we w ere misse. d *
"Our act of imprndence could, soarely be jutified even
by our ardent attaohment and: Fir extreme youth. At the
end of the holidayS Arthur weat to Oxford, and I recom-
menced my studies in the shool 'here I had spent my vaca-
tion, and. where I pent o more scholastic term, at the
en, of which I graduated, 
"Yotu may jdge my diieayherebfre when on going
to spend a few days at P   ,ace  i I was told' by the
princes that my inheritance of e estate was conditional
upon- my riwn'niing .unmarried. 
"oI was a very timid girl ati at t.*m. I did not dare
to confess my secret mahrriagee IysLezoe, therefore, was
caised by fear and not by wnpiia ' { , 
"In oedien   to my ani'~: r:i       tcthed te news-
papers or adveetiXeeti  in i   iaid  ans'ered many
- without sicuee.     ':. !     ': ' 
"At length, however, RI ot  'i BtI o   English teacher
hm a  E4glish, French. ' eSi   cho      at Osik. Oif
'catte, ditrag the past ye '.r      '   orrespoded
witlh my young husband  t   E   .rt dX had never seen
siitoe jbe left the 3JepbhoP& ^ ii Yorkshire.
'I now. wrote to telt hio          idedremoval to
; Oslfk. He came up to L   d.       mt me by appoint-
met, inne of the public p        her we took leeve of
eaceh other again for an                ineg Arthuk's
ordination and appointment to  .lra coy."
' "But,mamma," said  oliei  .iteutone, 'I do not
understand, and I wnt to          d. Is not n elope
ment and a secret maria ge wy cae, and worse
in a clergSman tan in m oieaP'   i not eritiising you
or papa at all  My heart shea too sore  for that  I oam
only asking for enightenment.-
".My dear, yes, of course, sue ronduct is very wrong in
alyone, and especially in a clergyan; but poor Athir was
not a clergyman then. He was only ayoung tt! Eogica
student forced into his eareer byi'the arrangpewtet of his



<pb n="89"/>
A TOUtuflwiD HAT                     8
faily, not talled to it b  relious spirit. And he wU
madly in love  th a p      ta      , who  had no father
or moer to conult. Thee was noreas   on why we should
not h*ve mrried, except that wenaither of r bhad anything
to liveo * .
"And wien we did marry,. depite this want of means,
there w  : $edlly no reason wy  we should not have narried
so'nlyem   pt Our own bh''lte, whch w      get under
the    'd   n'es, for I was a     of eventeen, and ha
a boy of   teen-a beauifu,   pale boy of delicate organ
isation ,rownd whom hung that propheey of early death
whic; inspired a tender cmp         o les potent with
me tb*a4he love I bore him., I  uld not ay no to him.
:I Went to Osnik and entered upon my situation, By a
str ge coinoidence-yet n o: e very strange, when we re-
membe how common the,name i-the principal of the
school was another 'Miss Snith,' an English womia , of
coQrse;  '  ..'  ,  ,  *  , ! *.   .
"While I liv ed i  Oni      s    nded  as Miss Mary
Smth   with my young husbandat Oxford, who wrote me
may long, loving letters, and with my aunt, the Prineess
Zaviesi, who wrote to me about once in three or four
month, by th   hand of the domestic   ait and. martyr
whom he calted her dame d .ompan  e.
"JMy aunt wa a confirmed inali at that timeiand oo~
fined fir the mosht part to her.ir. $he summoned me to
spend eery shool vacation ,wthJ her.   These vacations
incl de.two months in i4.wrner,. tWo weeks at Christ.
ma, and one week at Eastr     l nearly three month, or
one-forth of the year.  ..
.Durin these viits to thePac Zaviesi, the Oriental
luxry nd splendor in  i. I lived quite demorslised nme,
and untted me for te tlame and ascetic life of a
school mistress in a small Gern town.
"It was then that I conceived the desig, of keep   my
marri*ge    dead. secret from adl persons and  r al cir-
cumse   es as Lng as my aunt should live, and after her
death; o having the marriage ceremony b    eem  Arthur.
and 'myself performed over, again, as i:f fo'r he first time;
for remember, Isoline, our marriage wS ati that time a
simple Scoteh marriage, without ring,.lcenee, witness or
register, and though pefely legal, cld never have been



<pb n="90"/>
~~w    ers~    v   tott4 ~ep4idij4~
-  *hp~~~~~~~~~~~
~46w~fi~luas5 a ewife~~;;l~ar!  ''   too~a  Pi~ar~h1l
,epUrntio ioe
'iq~~~~~~~s~~~icm .:   i  ;



<pb n="91"/>
I $.t        *    wiu '  ,/   'An
ga' to 'ia'~ W .bpi t  ** '  O tl'  o  the  a..; *f  ,
S- z r* S>- /$ttt' J.'.,    '' ~'.nt ',  / '~ ' :,
" Z rT,^ .  y  : ? i.'y to nfl4 t :
chafr .*, bt ,,t$   tM  ..oeo*ki   t tmtmdl.
f,  fl, '. :                eh:
ifr z~~~~~~i.       , 
'*W ':",.'. ',;" " I '" ' u't; ' 'sav"  ' '
har  on * my ooflelen e all  i t;be ic  #tn lSe
(Ti4M not who tre, buit aithbelvd lt. 
">b'4e* Arthur! Re belPeved $ IM' I tbd him,
motiS  1                ,         *>ee  ,s I
afltf:   c;copdte IX .fjfin'Ta ttp p*a st
:  . ,.: ,,,.,.)^'w     r ,  .
..e,  h . erti; 1. ,,,t ,1  , ,;. : 
88itib t' S  MI  h;;^ 'iw   *  'll   .*



<pb n="92"/>
W      -A TOW01~u HEART
would join him at Woworth as his acknowledged wife, and
live with him in the curate' cottage there; but every
midmenmer, Christmas and Easier vacation I would visit
my infirm aunt; as I had been aceustomed to do, and would
be known at the Palace Zavieki only as Miss Smith, as
bheetofore, And this custom X should keep .p, for my
invalid aunt's sake, as long as he should live.
:"Athur agreed to this plan, though bitterly lamenting
its necessity. And having mad all our arrangements for
meeting at Woworth on the frt of the ensuing September,
we parted, Arthur taking the tain back to Oxford, where
he was reading up for ies arniation, and I going back
to the Palace Zavieski.
"My next act was to.se   out a teacher to supply my
place at Osnik. And I wase rst'ed that whatever other
qualifications that techeij,  o    essh she should have
the name of Smith. I did iotidot  but that I should find
the very woman I wanted-a. 4     is so vast. a place in
population, and the name f, i  t. s ubiquitous.
I did find such a waO'si   we.ryandsome woman-
somewhat past her prime, it    very good education, but
-without a character, ,a         .'
"This woman    uited n:'i,    .  I liked her all the
better for having no.teti r   '. i could give her a char-
acter that would be all  i       ith my late employer,
end which would make her mi,      and tool for the rest
of her life; for her bread  cn   d   apon my Wil
"Imade an arrangement e       new Miss Smith to this
effect: That I would send e w:,i  letter of introduction
from myself to my late ep      ethe principal of the
school at Osnik, giving her  li t   character for moral
and intellectual excellence a!d ral fitness for the posi-
tion she went 'to take; and th 'ive her an oppoi-tulty
of recovering her respectaebIe  i /tanding.
"In return for all ,these ben  I required a sight serv-
ice at her hand--to mail alllettrs that should come to
the Osnik post offse direcWte   i Mi ary Smith, to Het-
ley, Yorkshire--etley was a blet in easy walking di-
ance from Wowort-and also to poet all letters that I
should inclose to her to be poted from the Osnik post
office. These wre er   ight services for her to perform in
requital for the great goo I was doing her.



<pb n="93"/>
A TOR'TUR(l        HEMART             9
"This arrangement was made to enable me to keep up
a correspondence with my aunt, from Osnik,-where I in
tended that she should believe I continued to live and teach,
and where she would write to me. Miss Smith would for-
ward her letters to me in Yorkshire, I would answer them,
datingfrom Osnik, and inclese them to Miss Smith, to be
mailed frim that town. Do you ee?"
Yes,,I eee," answered Isola, with a deep sigh over the
fraud.   , 
"Db not look so wretched, or I shall not be able to con-
tint  my eonfession I Do. you not suppose that my own
consciene has troubled me on this account?" demanded
the lady.
'I beg your pardon, mamma," said Isola, meekly.
"Well   The plan was carried out with perfect sucecss
The new Miss Smith went to Oanik, where she was accepted
on my strong recommendation.
"At the end of the vacation I took leave of my aunt
and left the Palace Zavieski, ostensibly to return to my
school duties at Oanik, but really to join my hnebtnd at
Woworth in Yorkshire.
"He had a moderate salary, suffcient for or very mod-
erate wants, and we also had a cottage rent free-a very
pretty cottage it was, with an old-fashioned garden of flow.
er, fruits and vegetables-nd there we lived very happily
for several years. I kept up my correspondence with the
Princess Zavieski through the Osnik post ofce, by the
agency of Miss Smith; and I Visited te Palace Zavieski
regularly as before at all thschool vacations.
"in the second year of my residence at Woworth you, my
dear, was born, This happened oon after the midsummer
vacation which I had spent with my ant   At Christias
ou were not quite four months old-too young to leave
behind, while it was impoble, under the cirumstances,
to take you with me. I te ore wrote to my aunt, through
the Onik post office as befor, .begging to be exused from
my mual visit upon the plea of a severe attack of bron-
chiti  .
"My aunt wrote in reply the kindest, perhaps the only
really kind letter she had ever written to me, inclosing 
draft for fifty pounds, saying that she had noticed at mid-
summer that I did not loak well, and that she hoped I



<pb n="94"/>
Wsg; air
q4   ,.~~~~~~u    r , ~~~te,
dot~~~~~~~~~
,,  I u~~~~ 1-*: K"      Inc



<pb n="95"/>
"' ,  .  ".  ;. '' "  ;  :'f f  , "  . '; ,,<| / ..  I . 
-St .                      '',,""'
n .d 
'.'B                        :  ' '
*.- ,*f,.i*sh g,! ^        'a. ; "
'f       ifl..E._'          ' '' .'
/^^^09 fr,'l '': 
.       ,               I" .o,  ' ,t
':*'$,   r,,n.is   t y.p";:i..t "..  .,4  "  ,.
< t'^Fsu  :!,  1 'mnt       * /
' '   ."t t?, no ''_,dtM  rn li  "'
,*,*.!  9n   i,    X     *:;,' . ',
,.  a  '  '. ,.  '  ' ,  ,  '. .
a hfd ^ t<)oBnjBto eflfe  o  BtieJefif*xitrao 



<pb n="96"/>
986         IA IT Ii'CTD WbART
'neinber.that night of woe we. pent thee together, when
yo1u could not munerstand my distress ?
"Oh, ,es, yes, mamma, I Xaember," responded Isoeine,
*wth a sigh lhat seemed te. aSesve her heart.
, "M   agony arose fromtl tie   H ng that it was the last
aight we should ever pas togeheqr  In brief, as soon as
you had left me and had gom to bed and to sleep, I arose
and ma4e my preparation  or 'o departure. I wrote a note
to leaveUith you, to lead .,  to sppose that I was going
in the early morning to 0se', Belle Isle, on important
businesa  I went, in fact, O far as Demondike, where I
stayed long enough to ma.f    e evidence of my death
by accidental drowning--~ t'aidence which proved so con-
clusive to the coroner's jury ha . lthey brought in a verdict
'in, accrdance with the '  ',
"In the course of that ,i%    walk, i the dari~ess,
before day, I met but one jpi ;ennis Prout, the coast
guarman, who wap on hi t     .He turnmed the bull's-eye
of his lantern fallu  o: eein that I was not 'a
napiiois.character, gbti       on:td pased on out
of sight. Atr fte   h :   :it! brde and walked to
the Hawkevile rilway,            cloely veiled, I took
a;ticket for the early eip . 'n     whers, fst of all,
I went to a ior    ofa                ,    t a proper
dres, and then prceden  t. Za-ii, where I
arrived, apparenty  in an  o   notice hat I knew  ast
have been sent to Onik, i   . ;  had not had time to
reach me at Hawkevil.   ,, ,    n
"I was in good time to ':ii   e fneral of my au
end the reading of the wil:l:  w nstituted me her sole
heire. I entered into, .iosse~        on d '.myonor-
mou' fe   .n     "', .'                    .
 .    , .' : ,  .
"I AsiLq'lD into mudisputed  oes:: ion of my estate,"
contined.the lad, "and yet I helit ot in peaoet  I was
hanted,with theiear of recognition by some of the people
w'hom I had met in. the atmnt,  or the Christwas parties
*'



<pb n="97"/>
A 5 TOQTURED ^EART                  97
at Castle Belle Isleand whom I might happen to meet in
London.
"ITo ,idmsance favored me, however-the firt was,
that.neither the late Princeae Zavieski nor myself had ever
mingle: ntch in London society, and therefore thee could
be fewt; isit of condolence made to me  The seeond wa
that the ,a of mourning- would give me a fair excuse for
seoludiniyPelf, or seeming to do so, for I did not really
mean tot..ifre from the world, even for the briefest season;
on th!fi#, &ry-I determined to go abroad and see the
world/   !.- .                         .
-"I shttp the Palace Zavieski and went to Rome. There
it wa' tha  made the acquaintance of the Vioimt Seyr
TiYom  y find it hard to understand it, in people of our
yeaf  Isoline, but indeed we were mutually pleased with
eich       n our first interview," said the lady, with-
deprecating smle. 
"Oh, no, mamma; I can well believe it, for the viscont
is really a very noblelooking and attractive man, and you
are generally admitted to be a very hanisoe and fasin-
ating woman," replied the girl, not with the air of payin
a compliment, but rather that of stating unimportantfaets
"I spent a few months traveling over the Continent, the
viscount jouwnieyig  in my  ke. Son after my eturn to
Londao, whither Lor        followed me, e we engaged
to be imairie&d.
"About that time I held n morning reption, taking
cae to snd cards to no one wth had ever known me in the
country as Mrs. B  Irners I1ine. Also, I dresed my hair
in the new style, jst thea coing into fahio, whic
so altered' the charater of my Iae and head that no one
who had not known me intrbtely would have reognied
me easily. My reception was a very great social sucess;
but I was not happy, Isola  I was not happy  I wanted
my chid.
"I took the Court Jornal to keep myself posted in the
movemets of the nobility, only for the sake of following
the movements of the Duke and hDuchess of Grand Manors,
and knoming the whereabouts of my own ,ild   I made
many jouneys in the country for the sake of seeing or hear-
ing of you. I saw you many times, when you could not
see me, althogh I learned from the gossip of hotel servant



<pb n="98"/>
,.             r: .
~ ~   n~l     '~~ ' ld--
" ~~~ Yr   i' t
F~~E.4a
t~~~2.
Ust': '..~~~~~fe*
how-
Iikod'd:aa,,~      l~
'~  ~CC\.I   to      to
ace,~~~~~~~~~~
.'I"' ` _Se iie.*
emceed                       :~g~a q
W 



<pb n="99"/>
.  |;bei|b t e.i       '  ;"
Itth
''  ''', ''. :  ,    ':.'
" ,-^^F1,                  e 1.  X *
Bei.  < e: !^e' .  ,' ' '': h"
th^~;WIi^l-          wordt. u E 
,i ^I"  : .             ' ...
a-lpltr   $t b(lM  yq Wiebs n b
#^    '^^ Of 8g|  i  att
I-    Lfml lMUei*t}rwy I*n   lptia 'Ouk an4,t
lit~a^      Wp;* titet the
'4,#,+4O',^i~ct:. 'yt .tty.  '? t #i
Z' if teit efi'i b d  "  *'&  M t:o $  totb p
*''e. i '  TO |!itx' '' .,  5   '''  ' ''r'; ,_..''*,'' h,'
MP8.fi|   <      *' :I0# .  :".t .;  s 
*  .   . ipai  .e.  ~ iich a .t t ?
, tl l ,, ,:a   , ,  '  ' .*  '  . .  t   .
throat  j  *uluke went ,  w 4M
waSln1A'ot^u4Ui&'c
Be~~~~~~~~~~e~is tB~~  irh  hfa  et^ynhl
ftroii~r~ii^2fte l~t^ pa'i~ed p6 IrtW^ (at ^wy w



<pb n="100"/>
100          A TORTURED HEART
"No   That I utterly deny l" exclaimed the lady, angrily,
while a hot, red spot flamed upon her cheek--"Cosmo Belle
Isle is not, never could have been, and never can be the
rightful heir of the Princess Zavieski; he is not of her
blood   He is a stranger and an alien, dragged into the
case merely to enforce a cruel and unnatural condition upon
me-so cruel and unnatural that it should have been held
unlawful, void and of non-effect. No! and a thousand
noes! Cosmo Belle Isle is not the rightful heir of the
Zavieski estate!" concluded the lady, with the most pas-
sionate vehemence.
"Then, mamma, if not the rightful, he is certainly the
legal heir of that property which you unlawfully hold ! Oh,
I am grieved to the soul to have to say this, mamma. But
Cosmo is my husband. And even if he were not, I should
not dare to become a party in such a- "
The girl's voice broke down in deep emotion.
"Fraud! Why do you hesitate to pronounce the bad
word? Is it in tenderness to my feelings? You have not
shown yourself so very considerate hitherto I" bitterly ex-
claimed the lady.
"Oh, mamma! mamma        I would that I had died before
making this dreadful discovery I" moaned Isoline.
"Don't be maudlin I Tell me what you will do?"
"Oh, I do not knowl I do not know "
"Will you keep your mother's counsel? That is all I
wish to know," vehemently demanded the lady.
"Oh, mother    How could I look my husband in the
face, knowing that I kept such a secret from him? Know-
ing, also, that I connived at such a wrong done to him?"
groaned the girl, wringing and twisting her hands in the
anguish of the conflict between her love and duty to her
husband and her love and duty toward her parent.
"You take the part of the strongest against the weakest,
the husband against the mother, the man against the wom-
an," bitterly exclaimed the lady.
"No, no, no, mamma I Not so   I take the side of right
against wrong-as I must! as I must! because, Heaven
help me, I cannot do otherwise 1" moaned Isoline, burying
her face in her outspread hands.
The lady contemplated her daughter in gloomy silence
for a moment, and then said, cajolingly:



<pb n="101"/>
A 'i'MdVD 1AfT lTl
"Ipibe  xeft, my child 1 Let ne reason together,  I wil
endeo t  co~mp romise thisi it er with you, 1 ,
my ,    rWff9n< Ilve, anId I wl miake owr oe- , of
t- veioil te XriBi estaht to yo  n, o  BlBdlleu?,,
it    edxl i ecrte a Wieat   urtavg
.aare sbpe a3s nfpq to:you, ,btpermy
.gei^   s.'' 1  Cmoal Wbt. , eyiou, gosaty tot  com -
or thil from him-n.my n    it       girl,
drbp   ,, oeburniang face intoer t.ilig ha nda 
m to understand  " . , not k eep ta
(?iemnded the la4y, in bitgti. P4wig'o0L
!T N j8 no right to kep it m gnf w
yt betray il tbouh yow depr  ie do al my
"LoiS of wealth is not the gre"t of er i, en, ma
en if you wee to forft ys, which  do not believe
o.    I RobUldI C osmq would.never impover^i o., mama.L'
"IOe of weareltI no e gtha. te of'a e  .
ar  ght there," tsad the idy Wnoring te latter elaae 
in, er daughters pBeec  yur betirayl dof zy 'ecret
would in,9lve loeees u9id heavier than te lo of eath,
bwhich   e   nad-loesM tutcan Dever, be regtaired
in this world -4 $,'  te i, loa of repdltatiue, lB of
liberti. Xes, an4 'loe of *lietor  I wiU not surve these
acUlM:  m srmwl l~~tdo nou meni?" de manded
t0oli0o,  an agmy;o   < ,
* ~ff'no not kwwow mDoad t iyon noow hopwo
law  eth.Is th a  o  ie? This guiltles act of
1imOpe t^oe to m~elft '"        ' ' 4 ""
mamma? ThP law would construe tt 'toin-
pe3aaa would g t   tao Oor ," n  ired lo-
ILnegaasEing rather vaguely tod incoherently in the con-
~f i horib C~er terro. 
"law would eonstrue my act-my po^k repeat it, of
Bnip jinEtice to myself, into elay 
<-^tfmanma l don^t " cd th grl,  n el ap-
ping her hands to her ears  .
e#,". osntiiued thA ladyg seein g. lpdeep impresion
Bb had ad    , e lonys  i  iAn y word, I is it not?



<pb n="102"/>
'' )".' rr,g
'
:qr7:r,.R1: .' )':H i:nil4;w I
1j:: i'jf ,$'ii
., ,4! r,, .?
i:!" `" ?: .!
!: ;i
i ,
I' '
i r:4r: .c.l ,,
I: ; ::it ui i
II          \                                               .:1...                    I
I .., i
r. 1,
I
;    rzl
I ; :? I,  :
 IP1 ::
:$
:" :"31 
 .f II
t
: ;7. !;.:
i
I i
;p..r) jtul '
i ; r
:b(F.I ...I i
r;
Ig; :.
'Ii: ''. ''
u
( :::t Rt Fi't I
" .i.,
.,io:ui
fiiiidl
i . .:*e
J .
'r .*: iS L : L: 1
W '"jr
I: '
I:                          ;'                                                            I I
: , 1!.(
I'  'I ' ' : Ei;: Zpc

 i:;
i
trl:'il"IBtiboe
:Z IJ
sl,
:I.i' '                                                          I
r
:  ; ).
i r '1' ,,
lr ) I
t:
b0dtb;:i
i. :i
4: C;
, I
L' i
i;;r r . ,,
ii 1!.
:.II :
:r .. tra .1. i :; ,
a r !I
i
: Y :I h 1: ' '

it: 
I'' ''                                  !cns`i8urr;3;*t  -.b'id,'.L'
: I` 
i i
I
'' thCItbia9ib:b;s ,:IlpBrE
'I I
:i::
I..y.  \i
; .i.
t i: j
" i.
i I; rlci
f:"`
7

Dae:iiii
r9:i;J
'1 '
' '.' ''
                                                                  . r
.....,

i ''1.'31''
1. i  ,
L' i 1 ; .ii.'
' .  i I i.: I-! :r::



<pb n="103"/>
il ;k %T)'Y,1 'e
i'\i) : 51
r. 1. 
: 

Si                                                                       /                  r,.: . 2.
1;i r :s
!)n,
.:ir!: ;i '.; . ....: ; 1" '1':4,:;.; ::.:f 
.' : ::.";.I;.'' :`' r
tpr., i. ri ?'L' ''
.r
;Y                  5'dridb; ' ' '
b'l I 1 i;
.-r-n I  i , I;!!L, i); IY 1-* I..!. I
'I                          Ii  ;I                                 '''  i
rr;
II ,,
'' $; : '' ,I::
' *
r : rr Ir ,: :  . r:
r
I
St ::9ei                                      i
. i ' '' : '.i
9rg; I'
':' 
TgB: r
I) I
i:I5 II
'':' ,
' c i  .' tt
;#1r(14;4ff
:7 i: Ir
:i,
 .                                                              ;A"nii                
''" 4
,, :i r .il 8I
':                                                                  j4SI
4 lifB;: .i
: I :
:: i;'
il tr.::;ii ,.,.,.1
I:  ;15iiiiIJnues
.i !f' 1,;
.
F'\ f3
1r      l.                         : ti            ,,   .r
i: R Cj : : "' .i!r.!' at
r    s      ;   :r.1   I;Ji6;?,.  r i:Lii:  1: ;:I .r
i fAl
r r r r
,                                                                  ti.!.!
: : : r:l
tl)  :'
j: 1!
q
i:                                     :I    r,      it
1. i
) !' i
;;-''q: !ril: 1 ;:e
' clii
ii: i
,
t
ltItlig 
;
: i
-e6t c
I ..
'Pi I ;
asne
;iee 
i
; i2C'L
 ita
Y t ijiat:l ?; irrp. ;Ip;a
i
,,
'
I '. ; 
] i ;
I.  ;`                                 ,                          ;.1
. : r: 'I ,
1
 ..



<pb n="104"/>
11              1wirtJViUfV HEAT
"I do not want any &dminea~uld not eat any; thank
you."
"lot eeaaic, I hope" seaid the viscount, in a voice of
on    . : .  .
"Yes, deadly seaick," usighthe lady.
"Oh, I'm so orry t hear' hat. Let me in, dear! Iet.
me eee if I ean do anthin foyou"
"Oh, not Pray go away! ',o to dinner and leave me
alone. Don't you know r        "eae demoralizes its vic-
tins, so that they hate all ther fellow-creatures  Go and
let me alone, I say." 
"Can I send you anti' fn the saloon?"
"No, thanks, the  'i   ^    d   y own maid will at.
tend to me."            . . , 
"Belle Isle is here besi   , lopking for his wife. I
told him she was with youibntiii ized e viscount.
"Well, she is here, and hp qth.ve hSer," anwered the
lady; then, tunng to hr ophe aid:
Go; dear."            '      ": 
Isoline aroee, trembling w. e   iond       ed out
into the main cabin, whrl   ^.S           Ieut. Belle
Isle were standing t  toghe,. i p  ' ..,/  . 
Ris lodhipbwd wi'              oe       .
The lieuteant gave                      aying pl
"E hear that you bave *ad          friend on boatdL
That is ohaiming-for lyou I Bt is the matter with ,
you, loe? You are pale and  f      I You are saerl
ab leto 'tand 1 Ae you              suddenly inqird
looking at her anxiouely.    ;      .<, a ,, a,
"J-I suppose I am-sliwt a
feeble smile.              ..     '            , 
"Then bear up against i in be lt bning, love, before
it gets a   bfiR  hold on you.  a i -t alk and laugh-
eat and drink a s if theres         the planet earth 
'Take time by the forelock,' 'Eaift *e devil and he will
flee from youl' "said the lieutna  yly, as e uppored
her steps toward the compnion ladder.
In the saloon Isoline found he new friends, the ladies
of the regiment, awaiting her.
They sat down at one table, where they showed but little



<pb n="105"/>
a A 1oEAE .i. HEAfRT                lo10
appetite fo the motion of the ship was beSning tb affect
them1L,
qIsohine tas glad of the excse oqf seflsickne  to. tre
from the tbe into the olitude of her own staroom, where
not wen her bhusband intruded upon her, for duty called
hii biWte.i, nor er maid, for the latter like  ost of
her 'a       the frst to sucmb:to the mady of the ses
and tu    ther berth.
,And ^   eeral dayB frox this Iacline was oonfned to
her dli^rt*   it severe indispositio.
HAPT 'X 
THUm       r A GOTixt oSn
mother again. . Isol  lay in her berth, prostrated with,
nervons exhaustiom.
She was sufreilng mnchmore in mind than in body, btt
all her ihness was set down to the aount 'of eaeiclipk~-
. , .  .to
Lady   eyires sent her mo  maid, Mr,  Loe, every day,
to see Ms. Bele e   n t inquir after he health .
IsollZe coold not return the compliment by sending LonI,
with  epcf     inquiriea, to            st Seyred etateiroom  (or,
two;verr aent                the first plae Mis Poind
was ti *lad up with Beasckiesfl In the second place,
even i she ad    a'een well hertres  could not have sent
her int. he presence of ta  y      lesr bithe person of
the viwaoes she shoul have cn ned      her own body, be
mistress^ aid the secret should havebeen tha prematurely
exposed& 
"Ybiti r1  the voyage of the Autrfalasiana had been very
rough bit after ten days of high winds, and troubled seas,
and veOy aick passenger, the weather changed. and grew
calme, te i   winds went down, the wave su sided, and
the seaic patients o, well., e 
Isoline obeyed a standing summons from' Lady Seyree
to oms e to  eer as soon as she should be   to leave her
otatetroo m 
oh e   ine   psent f ofall to see er mothe.n
Isoline .wmt Rm'of al to see her moth.



<pb n="106"/>
; "' ':f 
.1. 'II . 
is
,, i I r, 'TiSr
 .I.;''C1:: ''E
;I:.:; : v'3' :i'''
'1. .I 1:
r.;
... .
I. 'C I ::": ?1' 'ii :I
I'.l I: I, .,
ii,
r.: r
:I 14sr ,:;
' '''' I ,1
r               rl                  ,I;i]   ;:t;;r:  : i
,:'']C.146111f: I 'I
i
"'      '                                               
r,,:; ?:                 r                                 ,
''
 ':* '1?Tlryy';T:'J:;:; i"''
';'f t 1 1;111 r
: r': 
:
'i etrtecid
,I .  I aaiiB;I . r
ic!Jjt4i ;- ''1
$:'   I:::
ri: OPOTQS:Cr:
lieep _pll;
i ): ,,,
1. ,1EJ'opl 1 .CjdiLil
.W1 ;; beiei; r i
i r Rt I
;q
I t " i' ;il
 
IpeP':  :  ; r
:*
Pc.l                                     I ,
; ci S4SC: ' ' . .:I;
\:
 !  I i: 
i: P.
''
t$ia;t:  r  :'
-
''
: :::I: 'ilri! II .Itgl
I 'i'
!'L: I 'fpfc- ' ,.
:I                                I                         i*2n                   ''
I (IIPIBiX:  /I :r:j
 I,.
r                                       (             ;iiCkrLh. 'C.
t.atk., EeBpLI .:1161111SdLllltXQP1IIlI&.t  t,
r r :s
L;
l"r :: :1
'1' I :I

  ,,
jEea i
..I :jii
II ; .;
i
(if
sifh
?e 'it&p, ;IpO

' L'
'i: 
: r
i !: ,
''
E.T        i              iiaa,                   I
;
1 5-.
 
' '
tCfbf riiitrdl E.te'11H[Eelk4q271 ,i , 'PI 5c: Ir.;
g .. 'I: r '
:
:i.                              
F.  Ie
(. 1.1 
I , i
-. d:. r . I
.I 



<pb n="107"/>
i'ri :.F; I!;
:I'Ji,; r ( ,..,..li'Mx
''\;
i
.r'r;i'r;i
i'' :,-. . !
,
:1ill ..'
;'. '' i i oi"
.
.I
i;
: .i. I  r
:
r ( 91i: i i: 
' i.. 1.(
i  , , F r
I. 6.4 ;:;J. ,,
\                               )                                  i                     '  .b''
a!
rl ii, lr
    '-, i II
: :
''
''  ;II: ::1ci
i '' $i 1.I , t
.I1
?: .; 47"?':
f:teD Is

' r
II 7',
.I:
:
,''r:d .:1
II ' '
( .. I: ii
i
I ;I
rtliatl r.,
C)T 1'. .:";
!;
.Tt
' Y r 6'1; .r  ! ;I :,r ,? ,olb";
1 r
I:
i? :ij - :."i19s
"
r                                         :
, , i , b rL;;
-P. 1 F;  ;:::':.: z
II
:i
.             :        i                       1    II-'      .
i                       "ri'                                                        (r.C:      I;
 YYi;
i' (;
..                                                 j

4  I
:i.rYa  ''':7i;!

. J.                                                        Y.' . ..:',  
.L
sis 
'' r:iI' .i
; i ,1
r  ,itw' ' :.  !
't
, ';
., r
j Ii
!C: :'T;::e
i. !
:i
IY :II;
i'SZ' t' !I$
, ,:I::' :
a:                                                        ffhrir.
'' ils 15a.?
.r( (:x
'i "'".
i
..                             I. I
;L
i     'I   . ;         ''('';F 1
'   L' i\' h 4fl
..' L , ':'. ''



<pb n="108"/>
108          A TORTURE. HARD 
"Then I repeat that within an hour after I hear that you
have made this revelation to your husband I will bury
myself, my sorrow, and my dihonor, in the depths of the
sea."
Isoline uttered a low cry o aiguish.
"I will do it as sure as. liv to hear that my secret i
out l  I will never survive ti shame 1" continued the lady,
with cruel persistenc                   '
Iolie, ith her aeb      ed in her hands mond and
rooked herself to and F.o  ,.
"And yet I want to iMve ta'ong as I can  Oh, Isoline,
my daughter    Your m      aoti , ag.s you for a little longer
li -a ittle respite fro,  'ianl1 death by uicide 1"
"Mammal Mlamnal Iy beart is breaking         I am
dyig1 I am dyingl moae thgir in a faint voie.
"Nsot so  Grief does n1j;rt    Hearts do not break!
No, or mine must have     . olk en ad I must have died
within the last fortnght i" ^ ^e :laay' in bitter scorn.
Nothing but sighs and teas resp   ed to her.
"Hear me, Iaoline,! ... :    .il   give up my secret
this day and X should d:;i, t a  !ownact, your husband
could do nothing whateve       ,*e, derive no benefit
whatever from the fortmn     i    months to come, or
until the ship thall reao1 'S    wn. Meanwhile my
poor life will have been  .     yabridged that much."
"Ob I my Father gn^ H  <m the girl, claspiber
band.and risingthem' in       ,p         This tah k  is
enough to make me a.ravila
"Control yourself, Isolin;i  r    your revelatios to
your husband .htil the hi       at Hobart Tow, then
that revelation can be a   t::     onsiderlt  The hip
may never eaach port. She       ' ni yo  down in a atorm. She
may perish even in a calmn,' ds conflagration, and-
I may be savd the crime oi       and you the crime of
having driven your mother    hdesperate deed. I only
entreat you to forbear until we ei  Hobart Town, if we
ever reach it, 1when the ca.e ca  aceted upon, and then
you may tell the secret, the fellg oft which must.kill me,
for I will not outlive dishno t    forbear unmil then!
It will do no good to tell my eret here. Nothing can be
done It will only shorten my life ad load my sotu wit
the crimeof suicide and your soul with the iame of ha* g



<pb n="109"/>
A TTrTURED HEART                   109
eased it. If yoU forbear until we land, something  ay
ooeT hn the nnntinie to avert the terrible necesity of the
reveaton and the catastrohe that mtst follow it! And
I wish.to live a little longer, Iine, and to die and be
bu~od,    dry land   Will my child grant her doomed
moer         rieve? Will she forbear to drive bet to des.
peratiion,   kill her body and soul, until we reach port?'"
implore~ 1t,. lady.
Wha .aold the poor, tortured, agonized and frenied
daughtXed?                      .      .*
"I wtll keep this secret until we land,' 'Wnot*," she
breatiie in a voioe so faint that her words could scaroely
be,  r,
*Ad before her mother could make any repi7, Isoline
ror,  opened the door and glided out into te cabin  Stag-
gerig, eatching at the air for support like  drunken man,
she reached her own stateroom, where she fell down upon
the floor, insensible.
There a little later she was found by her husband, who
lifted her and laid her in her berth andruhed off i great
alarm to bring the surgeon.
This was the omm.encement of a severe attack of brain
fever, which brought Isoline to the verge of another lif
Cooo,: Dr. Boggs and Lona   Pond nursed her. The
ladew dW the regiment visited her when it was permitted
them:to do so, and offered their servies to relieve the
husbad, the doctor and the nrs~ein their weary watching
by the Bterer.
Butlidy ,Syres never wet        the idek roo  She
sent 'l  ,woman, Mrs. Low  two or three times a day to
inquire after Mrs Belle le anid to express her sympathy
with, aind .nx ety for the uerer. But she did no more
How ~ald she? She dared not meet Coemo Bee Isle
or Lona Pond face to face,f fo r of recogfitioa   There
were m   ent when dhe thought she could lrave uch a
recogeol A   out, and that their nnm conviti   of her death
and their established faith in the-to them-nnimportant
fact of MiB Smith, the great heires, and : B  Ire'
vine, the poer widow, having been to ditit person with
nothing to do with each other, would bear her out so that
any acaiatia     who might meet her aw might se a



<pb n="110"/>
' ' ~f 
Its~~~~~~~\
r             r,~~~~or'a d
worstioi~'   r ltctra
I ~~(~~ te
0kr     `'    ~  '
'~bib  `&Beaei~ ~i~ :~i~ l, ,one; * ,
n w I



<pb n="111"/>
neared h  ei destination.
,,a"ir !;l'tiie unhappy Twma waS'm e ,se'O      -
demine prser.
Tjw^  t,*e plea of seasi kne  hich l nlonger exited,
she k$ *    :itateroonl the greater part of i'e day, pcarcely
' i(n: iliture out into the abi: upon which it opened,
- len. hiB   bemet and r eoop  *   d the two e.
80D w    d i 2lt inown her i4 CoraU*, as 'MrB. eruer Ir.
r+,*9et. own etateroo, whyr e th  rervebd t
,';, ' iand where *'e was ,w aiSed ony        ..t ow*
anei    ventued  n deck iunti, afteir ibdowin he
;ibikee Up, heav 1 veiled, lesnizg onl hr husdands afB
mtiw/ed faor aa hour, "and .hen sat 1owi.with her fice
t.ned away: from the shipi and loking oi ib seLa
Her fllow passngers, and particularl' thie ladiea of thie.
regient, commiserated her sad condtion, and would
haret ^ne uanything in their power to rlieve hr had itbe
tb;Be perUitte to'do so '      . ',  t     , ' '  1"1 ,' **.. 
The voya4  was hal .oer before the criis of ISolno
:Bele Ile'l s'ilea wapa  n      e  as '  declad sto be
qut Ofd ang            ....
JHer    alecepoe wa   y sow, tedi* ous, and protract. :
It wa;sa month lonigpr iefoe hwas able t be carrid
ap oddek; and then *o extiene was her we'akneas 1tht
she fainted on the bid otf ,, . ad cushion that .ad beep
pr       or her.      . ,    .  .      '  '   '*
.';I~owtlon'; she panted, o.on ivin g fom her fr
-"how long VUwi it be before w* reach Hobart ToltT,
"1Not more than two weeks at farthest, dearest:  ier
up 1 The time ill om pa. nou ad'bring us nt tit,
said ber usband, *wo naturally 'ppoed that 1l wl was
weary of the long sea oyage,
But   oline signhed hprooundy, for the ved $the voyage
was, tob '. apprehenon, the end of hope tbt4d of peace,
the enr of love, the efd of life I 
Isoline'had been religiouel traied h  the rector qf
Hawkeville  She had been one of the 1t   mb 1qf that



<pb n="112"/>
ll          A ',iOd'k          . HEART
good shephe, flocki ' But    faith, was paesing through
a fiery, trial now. 
To showw how terrible aninceher mother's failt and
her own dil.ema had aupo   th  well-meaning girl, it is
only nee   y to say that 4  ' down in the obecuret shad-
ois of her  irit lingered       d insane hope-an un-
acowledled, desperat.e ih"at the ship iight never
Oh she would neer, AM' 1ave owned this hope, far
leas would she have exreSt!;:. he would have been hor-
-. ' '. ..'ri&   hd any hu man. i      it. Whatl to wi   at
i    :Sith a thousand         sous on board, shold
at ea to.eoi              d twoor threeinter-
:._.      R    from    i           it
,.' *I      ,'lHorrie, mon.rttl
, .':And',,~t  yet that thought " tl  'lived and lurked, un,
' : ooniued, in her bosom. ; '  .
.. ' ,   D    da D cloud rise on           P Didawhisper
of foul weather ahead           P?
Theem sins, thait                 with fear, inspired
hers wit.h  p I      . h.'.
Hush Iwhiper t lis      h         if the ship saould
founder, then she woirb   ,    ipeed to reveal her
amotherls dishonor and dmtoth          to depertion
and deathl ' !         '  ': 't  ,,                . 
You see that, by her ei         i,   her mind was
thrown off its balace, and    iii       m tte insne.
On the Sunday morng Ji           her first appear
on de   after her covl        Ittended         service
in the min cabin.
The chplain of the             the prayers, acording
to the forn of the C h   ^         which is almosex-
actly ,the  e  as our own Es *i  ritual.
Perhaps it was because  i     ad been so long abent
from publi worship that the       and beautifu Litany
impresed he so deeply. A     ian "the form of prayer to
be used at sea" was read min r ai   t manner by he chap-
lain, the words so pierced   her  theh at the light of Heaven
was let in, showing the depths f. evil in her.own soul of
which she had never dreamed in her former esygoing,
BspeFcial, self-complacent religio. 
"Oirt of thi heart ome     * a  rder."



<pb n="113"/>
a :iXsa-JS U       IEA$T           s1
He   hd ahe besn cherishing a deeply lurig hope that
this good Sip, laden with so many hundred of    uman
eouls, Shouli!go to the bottom of the sea to save herself
and oaa other fom an agony worw than death, that must
be met ad ,dured shoad th    safely reac harbor 
And ,'me. were ma    ny Chr  '  ferventy returning
thanks ,t *   Almighty for their preservation from the
dangers o le deep for so many weeks, and imploring His
divine prq~eotion to bring them  afely "into that haven
where 'bi   uld be."
_Isio ~awd  made a discovery that filled her with self-
horror togeat  for teamrs She could ,only in deep humil-
latio iegnae and amknowledge the secret evil that was in
her; id "pray to the HeavenlyFather to take it a wa  ;. 
A ferthat came a strange trust. She cou ld Se  a
of. light, no ground of hope, but she trusted, and& onan.
mnoe peace.
The ship was nearing port.
It was early in the preceding December that they had
sailed. It was winter then. Their Chbrtas had been
celebrated On board ship, but she had taken no part in the
festivities, for she had been confined to her stateroom by
ness. Intheir voyage half around the    orld they h
passed throg   every change of climate, and now, being
within two days' sai of  obart  own, they were in the
month a. March, and in braeing autmn weather.
It was early on the moring gof the fifteenth that the man
on thelookout caught the. rt sight of land.
A fe   hours later all t      4he' "-asenr who could leave
their cbins 'were assembled in' deck with telecopes and
fieldgeo*B, which they passed from one to another, ani-
ilsyvieing that bod, rocky, and repellent coast locking
in the dark land chiefly known to us through the horro
of Maq'i Harbor, Port Arthur, Maria Islnd, and oter
convi~tations.
dLa  Seyre kept her stateroom; but her fellowpaen-
ges rti*aned on deck, never leaving it except fr meals
until the shades of evening gathered ove th  scene and
darkneo. hid the dreadful fasci'ation of tlise shores from
view.
Isoliie, who had beea on deck al, day, isited her
mother in tihe s   om that evening, ad remained wit



<pb n="114"/>
' ' ' ' ~~~~~~~i lot 00
i ')''~Wit h, t;e h"
I~~~~~~~a le
Abate,:r~g       ht'OE~~i  .*D
bid~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i
t an~~~~~~~~~~~a 



<pb n="115"/>
I'. )' ,,.
'  :  :  ' ''' . ) ( i'
,,.,      
  s .
1  ,L
I" . C: ' 1' .I:
I .. .. L;';
)I '; : r 519-T :LIPBr''
'.81019  I
I' )
t: :.WlcYi. :ri--
'WCL(I ' Bcii ,
"dTa' r
Z; .',
''' SBI:ga' ' ' .'alaafii
* ;
I i. :j.
 . 
,...
,.eitlpet ai;ka::,i inat e
.. ..-. ,.... ..
:iJe
,.,,
sBS
$I1Tt; :                                 ,  '
I the
:
as: i ta:j oaan-,
, I)oiifi ` ` :I
,             :2          i
' 1RPiijq: I a :  ,1
1. ibr d,e:'8s ' aotl
.lrcr. , bid, or, iti
''IqllBI:tih'i
.1, f '
r P. IiLII ) ri .. I
(:t Y:.
nnme m : 
 . .
,
rr; ; 1
( .I 1
:SriW;`i ' '`;;
 ,tkqi:PPzgt II
tn
:.1.- .. ..j               17--i
mi d'li:epawlr
nlndrsa  :Fkii
 "
: I
t o.ue:.tcca:
i
,p 4                     a             
:
 .Z r 
,. ,...
rjriciia, :Cfj F6 i
.fail tts I    ' 
: ,: '
I  .. ib6ma' ti91 I:1 .II ' '
LiS jqigpt. I r
vva, .j
I
n "I
iii :P''''
'     vOf:    , c           a         y
I:iiiie dn
Rwaem I;glT
w   ,
.. ,
1.
 r)   ` '   '  
I' .
,.iaTO;as "-;;'
;1 IprF , Q#ttll
r 1
tM'i!- PT-'T-
EBfii:
 :  i i'''
:.. :



<pb n="116"/>
"Ad the day of lipgM tm osene
"res and yeas and              'a'
W^hat done;  , d         ^iirrh taled X  y.
"I -  o-nl         trthf ,wht yo a
"Tell me pleana to inform O~ao &Ue
Ide of his right  %      to-day?,! inq~
tho vloouate, in a    ,       
'" must inform aim  ,-  Iu  e Ihpt the
"You will be ai.1' ::: 't ~ yel  dt
hmoI" hissed the
"Oh, mamma, ma , .ina   not sy m!ud awf
wors!  The   free      Wi    the miiserable
The !Whit, wh ovr lam         y ,hjoiam
w hu  bed, iy rCadc              wheg:
ame ed aeft a. is
thete vernor' esoor                    1
fhd y wife :r h.,               r se a t dh
thace  ,gs t 
tfiuhe. new - wuo    newt govermnor
dthe guroard, Me o'-atea~
etomby io 1rm~.l r      which ~   a feannd
Vim~  lik  0c,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
by~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~*



<pb n="117"/>
A -jroftzo      )i  WAIIT            117
Other boats were filed with officers and their ladies
Coemo Bell Isle haded his wife into her proper place
and tok his eat by her side. Another boat held the regi-
A valeditory gun was fired as the fleet left the ship,
and hedsdtup the inlet towardth town.
They    _od ships of all natido   riding at anchor in
the baf      co.
One aip;, with the union jack flying at the mnsthead,
attracted particular attention from the boats and cased
exelateiatb i of surprise.
Wh9 fl itr?' inquired Isoline of h her h ad.
^"Wh , it iS the La   r, tat hatwa gaetted to sail ten
daye    iter aour own, and here she is in before us-hai
made probably the fastest paage between London and
bbair  Tawn on record. We shal have news from Eng-
land ten days later than that we bring, lghed the young
lieutenant
As he spoke, te Labrador fied    salvo shot in honor
of the new governor.
It was answered by a cheer from the boats as they
passed cloe to her larboard side.
In a few more minutes the fleet of boats was at the
wharf, whre the ex-governor and his   it, the town au-
thorities. and the oflie  om  the  rr      ere waiting
to receive the new man. 
Carriages were in a~trdcee to acmmodate the vise
ount and the ladies and gentlme of his mst.
Agreat crod of a      somprisng men, women and
ihildren, were on the wharve to see the sight-for the
arriel of the ship with the new governor and a new
re^gient made a sort of Fourth of   ly o   or Fifth of N
vember to the dull little capital of Tasmnia.
Theee people raised a shout of welcome, which.was, how-
ever, oon drowned in the rondo of salvo shots from the
berrates as the new goveror's boats touched the whaf.
Lord   eyres led his lady out to the coach especially
waiting for them, but was met on his way by thi dignitaries
gathered to receive him, and was compelled to exchange
greetin  and complimets with them before he was per
mitted to put the viweonteas in the carriage prepared for
them and tae his eat at her side.



<pb n="118"/>
I I:I .(
:, ,,, : 1; i p r i I):IIbp: :; ,  .!
 .i.
 , ,tc":5',.
,. 'i
.r pvu !:
'prY9.': ra Y:.)/::: I) t'(
I (i ;I
;'s ii
t! !:li
.,
,,.. -; IftSa::::::::::::::::::::::::: ; I. ..r 'i
;c. il :u :
rrr: LIL
: illi
' :tlu2:r"'
P::         ::             ;, F:;
 .I :
r' r
:         ,                                        j:                '-"   "  ,n
; .I r , 
ri.%
'' iP4: i, ',u
: Dr. %
 :I:
ii
i 
: ; I: I I ' I a: rasbrze
'     idg                          r                       ,.
! ,, t
 ,,  i  
ti
L L
L iii
,?: ii
iii  ,. t r
) 
''
' L
--*                                                            "
:s. I
!ia-aibitaR e4e:
cas by:tie'i  ;
,.1.
I i
;r i rre  I  it
-i. .II:
I  '''  : : I':
1  ,
I- ) l,'t.r.
r. Y'
itie :3e                 :
I : :
Z C
I
I 
tri ,, , I;
ri ?.
_io. -1181 rici
iYLj* tilf
 a;::sc:; r: iii 'I
r!  wife:'
'' ''' I
ir           I.                           St 
:II I,
;I '? h :
"
C' PIPe I''
II i:  g 1 ,
1..,
'
i'! ''
Ig 1:                           :bsr                  11. . : A.L
: r
;(lij ' ' ; :
;r r kd
\r' I
:I
roorm c I
' '
;tilei
I  .   , r. 
  1
.. . 
 1
.i' ,  i' : '
1 ,
.:::
:,,, . .



<pb n="119"/>
 ,
I-. ,,
..
 ;:li: :''
I
L ii
.: d::
 :;S"i : .:.111
I 8X::.
 , , .,
: I ` I
:i/ I;
.:i :i :I X .1
..
1, i :;
;tOd  :.. I!
.
r
,a :   ';:9.:  ...' 
''
r:
plc .1...
 ;
''
nl
b i-?:..LTITI;.
f7'0i4':: ,:j
I i i: .. :, i
 ,, ,
c
,
'''
ll;kP :;.1 -
bo :
;:1 1a ! r
i
.
I 
5: ';
I;                             'idl;;                                      I';r
;r! '' ':r
i
E
; I:(
lilkb\  ,. rlil ,,
i                ,wrsrra-                ,              '
::i
:15;;\.i FqP   i
t
I
?'' * ii..:. 'I,
I ,,
1'L j .L1   ''
'
  ( : :
I'
I
c 
'il
.r. :-
;;I    'I;;      ;;;;;            i  r I c..
4
;UL
.1(rie148;,  rlt       1       'XkL4
r '
;sa" ..
,a;rias:
rL P
-r C

.: U.,,
iser'i.t:'. 
rip
Ibfll 'ajEQ;ri  
i:?  :'"s r i i.
L.. .;.
;. '"I
;:? ; ,dl:d 91 ?" '': :":. '
'111! ;S.i ;
.. :tP
Pi bint;:: 4;r.i ;
; 1'  : i :, .V: r;;  r ! :;I .
. , (;C :: ,.: \:u.
i
: r;
i; I
,I i FI:
rr
I 
i r:I.ibtjt . jpliL
'r#ZaZ 
;.4 : re,1SdI fib; `'wit
.Sa:Itb3ri:: .:l[f 
Fe
c ;901
,,
80eil'!
nelfcri''pa3 ;i
ifjtl(ljt3 t arGX
, u
i' , ,    I  1 
IPe t :
,,
'  :: ,. .: 
:
, i
j i' 
i  II



<pb n="120"/>
110     .   sA     bUl              '    fl'      /; R
bhe setthis ate down byr at* l .mb* maid t ths
di      - .t     ,to t,:.it tto,      .   .      ' ,/ 
fprei4 sntly .the c t    ree        ed. d.  e  oo
bearnfig another letter  .,.'      ,      ' .
Troiu*ght by, an orderlhoi   g ovtue  nt boaei, if  1
yo# please, ma'am, which 1e aas it is ivieiat) and hea J
gwiulW a m gaswer,"   ,i; <  -,                      ,
Isoline took the letter ae rMggised her motWs haq d- '
writing.
: riting..     ',  *.,. , !t:.' , .'.. ; '.'.' ' '  '  ..... .'  t 
She opened it "in tr^m,ij9  im fear."
She read.:                              , ' 
..    <.T        ^^1Thday E                      ig.
;  ^"Ieou^^ : .]I kn dow  h      .rknid has be  o ce
Pied all day, so tthat yopportunity of con.
fiding to hum the d          '.; feel it you duty toi 
tell, even atthe p ^:. .          life abd honor. I 
know also that Lieut.  e     *   itfy at the barracds,  X
aad that you arq aot                       you i
have no occasion to maii  'y0              him u. .,
tff to.morrow.motpn,: i ,, m;            ,i i  ,     -,,
I aleo'am uone    '   Ni g   ^.         his e4xae: 1
lency beig claeteh jit          ifor the eo.; 
,Wovw, 1 must haveja ^         jo this very nlt 
I ihave received by the        -  o    tartling 
from England, which   w.t      ,   affect my          ' estin
and your. Imustimp      'irt     to yo at 'ce  b-
fore you have any expli i       ' , certain subject witth  '
your husband.         .:^o? ,i;.:: ,             . 
"Come to me iitheat               ca i    or
"You may bring your mia .ijt ,pleaae;    t if you,
do, you must leave her in th. oe e outside whi yo. 
come in to me. Come quicidy ta ~ sorely tried but stil
afectionate mother,                  M. S'rB. B."
Isoline folded the note AiRI j .a  i her pocket, sum
moned her own maid, and said:.                     , .
"Give me my, traveling.ht ml,'cque , and then get
ready qickly to.ten   me. In (w' "  out fra, dive.
The astonished gir was too ei tf   to   t:   h   '
eel     on this seemingly strage zolution of erW 'mi:
.  ,. ~~~  p;,  :.J



<pb n="121"/>
\             :/  A TO&T'TOM HWlo 11 I'
* ot fo a d' i  throu * atrmn'e city ,n!e
b~~-d othe night,h W tse wutterea    ittle !thi'ha-
ellf  she bedye the order, eand b:roit the oay cab-
en rd gTay felt hatam tbhir bhbzee, hd bte weAt
to'     ;tiher own black boanet and cpe.   " 
T*d     ~ idown the gp3 and left the room, lockin g
' i hernL .   -     *' .  *
let      P  waited before the private entrance of the
.M..  . .le and her aid entered it ad wr re 
idly d:tknbgh the t~       to the govenmeht houre.
'    !r^ly /who had brought the menage to Mr. Belle
:I de o had ridden onz the boxbeide the. ochma,
n '       win end ap!ik~ t'the set'soth  the gatte, who
th.awirwide the ievesb and let the carriage pal   n. 
TDlaTre pon each side of the main n tranoe howed -'
li  f bad stoe efntep. leinng pt' the dosable door.
rt,, 'eTdedrly k'lmoed aoir admittane '.
The imon:a was nawered by a portr in    white wi
white nekcloth and bleak br oadloth  it, and who look 
lihe.e astout bshop..' r  .
A footman, in livery, ihohad evidI ent had ha oiderj
to tlh effect, atood wating to reei ve the visitor, ana im-
inedirt.ly upB her Mppeoaw   maide anobeisace and said: 
"This way, i you pea    nadan,"-aud led the lady
through a lofty bhll, b p-  I bread tairae, an.  tok a' double
dooa*bove, which he thre o'hn  he aonnced: 
"Mrs. Bellae sle.t"  ; '   '
Iholune found heirlf uti   p<so ,plendidlyfr^   d,
but dimly-lighted a     r        some  glimmefrnft ob.
scure cer of whi     a    y   erged and   aaned to
meet .        t  '   .:  . ,
.The footman, meatine, had' closed the door and re.
treated."  ' : ,',
The lady took the p  ution to turn the ki y before she
held out her hand to her vieitor.
The' malachite clock on the ilhly.wrought Iian' mar
ble m   pitelpiece struck sewn as their hand' met.'
"I thank you for comin&g, loline. '~niUl arien grate-
ully reied' you ktin. I sapposem, I yobud got the.
chaua to do, sou itld have oldto   nr h& oiwl  to-day
that I;   eepiag him out of th eC 2viek      tate bt



<pb n="122"/>
`' Y Y' :?II?
ui': a
i'i: r
1 ,I
:  ' '

Ii
:  ..                                          I;   ..              :         r
:;I
.I X' ,
' ' h P1
-
.'I ,L
!  r irl
I :? 'r :;
r
:i :.,'
:P)aSt! ,r 
                            i          '
': :.LI
i: I, ( ' i Iir
liL ill I )i
i:
! '1
i:                                                                                         i  ' r
;i .1.
 (
a: 7 );
'' idISX
2; " cp
 ;;
Y
....,.  ;b
 i ' i
Pt;r ')1 Li i I' '
rr !
i. ' ' ;; 'fj
:r ":
n
I:i
:iiiIli:\;
;4 11
' :'1; a:T I' '1
''' Li..ii
: 1 ,, E,.
i  I ;:
,.r
:: .i
Utpj i42t'h esrlerripaa :
6
ii ,iilf
I\ r ',  - I,!,, i::
 rjb *1: .,: I
.? i: :I miJ
;LV:
sr :,
II .:g:?(1
t '.:
:r ',:`' IIL#13AhLIIII.;:6gRlslLSfl*I r JI : ?
.i:"': "
, 1121'3
(rbb''pl I;
:: ,:':j
1;   '                                                                                       : i
ilbijj
: 
itia; ;c;!r:
. i'iie I: cna
I'
"'
1 (
::; ::i
1 r
r I r
.I                     ,      ;:;v;                 ;j
loire i. 'i( \i
r:tri
. :. IL(C!FI. I ILI1 I I
':)(
:!xr
 :1
:
 \
F
ri  ''Y
I I. h
;"' I
\, i y`'ic
i                           :f'                    :  ,     i
I, ' .( i.
II



<pb n="123"/>
.  .                                                                L
S ''
, ,.. . r
.ij? :1', .rl
li.                            :           : 
II : 'I
 .
i: :;,cl"::": ,:
,I ( '`
i 1 :' ':'
( lr
 , ;.?I L. r
'?, 3 r
i
il: I ''HI.
;' t;;: :,: ; '
: u ii :(
,IL:C,
"
I:

i ;1
jrl ,v ! I,,,
116 V  c:  :i:   i; Ci;I o' . r
 rl:. I
a* :3'ri'  tj   
iiJ(I \
 :
L$.(I iLlr.):,: ili:  :111 ; \ r
-e r: 
i. 

'.:: Tagmr- I+l*HQI iaYCli;.llYPICIIEUIUBW iYB r. ' i 1
 1
, Y
: ,U !WiiCY-:u-s';L1-'Y-l.i
ilir;laiisareFai:#uwcrip brili'lr,' 1!,b
?  ,
j
r , I
I '' '
,
,! i
,
i
ii I:
.!. i
r I i
t31 d
i. I,ul a t:!l;c! ijr: jbot: ,
I 1: IF i' .i
.,L ' ' '
;  i, I gbt:
rl.i
I :rl ;1
;i  ,
iur c ;.i :: r r:.It
' ' r.
.i c: Ir!
''`' :
r r
,I::i,, 6:f :Ir: \: !. 
5  . I
,
:1
: ::un w`uE :IARCBILIY 'XIRLCIB
;tia_q             : 5:-..-r.'in F.IV nl
? ;ii.lY   .                '. z iYi 'r' i. IIYITlnYLYIH:i:  '`'   
: 
'1
jSO,:
u .; ii
t;or 91 r
-                                    I,                   3t-   : :
i
 Fi;t
,,,,,,,,,,,,,, SWlijt'Jn3oxi ' '
AdOlEt. ... ,,
I  ,.
"i "?i  \.
I, I :i ''
.,Y 'r:
I;:, r ;J :
 ;; at. .it'* ' 1 ! .-r



<pb n="124"/>
124          A TORTURED HART 
"'Waiting  yor instructions in the premises, I anm,
madam, your obedient servat,       PaEm    POINSBTT.'
"There r said the viscountess, "that is the lawyers let- 
ter. I have the legal right to one-half my late aunt,'s
estate, for it was left me unconditionally. Cosmo Belle 
Isle has a legal right to the other half, and to no more.
So he will not be wronged uttof a farthing. He will, of
conre, receive the rents and the interest of invested funds 
to the amount of half the income of the estates for the
last year, and an equal ha  of the real estate and capital 
s soon as the transfer can be made. So you see, Isoline,  '
you have not the least oeoid.o to denounce your mother
to your husband," condceaA the. lady. 
"No, I have not; And, ohi how I thank Heaven for 
this deliverance I" erchnIue  so;line, bursting into tears
and sobbing for joy. 
"Of course, I have a  onfesion to make to my own
husband-a most humiliating confesson indeed, which this 
new will at once forces upon me and failitates," said the
viscounte, in a grave tone   , 
"Mrmma, lovel however it enda^ you will feel happier  :
for having made the COnfin       'It must be a terble   : .
cros to bear through life to carry in.one's bosom a secret
from a confiding husband,". *th  ied Isoline, now with
her arms around her mother~edk and her lips pressed
to her mother's cheek.     ,                             I
"Ah I you have found that oat in the last three months'
experiece, omy poor ehld~" ighed the lady, returning the
"Yes, I found that out n  lthlast three months, when I
kepta secret from Cosmo,",breathed Isoline, in an almost
inaudible voice.              .
"Andnow, love, I am goingtoend you home to your
hotel. And when you    om   aain, my dear, I hope to
receive you as my acknowledged daghter. I shall make     .
a full explanation to the viscount and trust in his gen-
erosity and afection for forgienes," sid Lady Seyres,  as
she touched the bell.
A footman appeared.
"Show Mrs. Belle Isle to her carriage," said her lady- 
ship. 
", 1



<pb n="125"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    125
Isolane  sed her mother and left the room, attended by
the footman.
On descending to her carriage she found Lona Pond
uttig within it, fast asleep.
* Bak to the  oyal Victoria, she said, as she took her
Her entisnee had been so gentle a not to disturb her
miid's slumber, bat the srting o the carriage did so,
and Lona Pond started up with a shiver, and drew her
shawl around her.
I never knew the month of April so raw and so cold,
ma'am, said the girl.
We are at the opposite end of the world in whih we
were born, and here April corresponds with November,"
daid Isoline, with a smile. "And  hen July comes we
shall have snow and ice," she added, with aother smile
"What a queer ountryl How far re we from-Aus-
tralia, maam,'if you please  inquired the girl.
"Prom   AiiatrH- i   repeated Isoline, musingly. C"Let
me see-the north coast of this iland i about one hun-
dred miles south of Anstralie, and the island tsef is about
two hundred miles from north to south. We. e at the
south and about three hundred miles from   Antrlli
replied the lady.
Her maid stared in arnhmet and diapintment
for a fe  minute, and th   burst out with:
"Oh, my good gracious alive, dear m'am, I didn't
know that! I thought all thes ontl-ndwh places was
huddled up dose together, and Melbourne and sydney and
Hobbyton was as near each other as Hawke     and Belle
Isle and Bovling Green, at i rame'
hey are manyu hundred mie    prt," replied the lady
The girl fell into a mournfl silence  How ever shold
she     her sweethert in this wilderness of space?
It was so late when they arived at the hotel that Iso*
line, o  reahing her chamber, at one dismised her maid
to bed.
But the lady herself did not retire to rest  She thew
off her hat and jacket and dropped into an easy-hir and
fell into deep thoght.
She was relieved of the terrble neoesty of detnw lng
her mother to her husband. The secod will of the lste



<pb n="126"/>
'  '" c ''P;.
hi :
u
, Ih(
'i ' '
'r  ii.! ,1,,I.I :;'v' ,, ! \
, ,I... zt ! ;!  :ii:  1I
r. ,C';
j
'I i r .
I                 ;iYE;$; SBI I        'i
 ' '
I:          ....                            ,                       '
'' ,1 ; hmi.:ICL ::rEQ5
,; 
' E
.bas? 'J
) ri;l ! I (
t j:
ehil; ' ! :
i.,
I I r,. .r..... 
I
I I  r
II
.r
I` '1jii 'Sii :taea;ti:i
sY id 14
I IbihBbs ;ioc)iitl
. the: IbbircbCt6]1':I
,,
IQf''
r
iirfd; '' i ! tnst::clsh . 1
i
I  .oldb r
Idi
tStri idsl ''' '' tn 1.;
,,I
:,  .
'L:r
-j
.,IaE1Ei tt:
rrsil
"
..
1. . 
': '' ;I '' i ''
, IY"(BP;I
:Bie Y
t 
,i !"3r ate.
:                                                                    i    """"""""""""""""""""  .?
Cie: .jlllCiE tTiipraw;
. ; ,:i ,.
:66'1;
;
., :
8' ':::
r  

: i'   1 :'!I

(\ ,
!' MdrdsC \L:
 I ii :Irsri 'thrs I:li
i. , I
'J8t !oebat
;;:t  .                         ;I    r       ';
;. :'i
..                                                        Jutb.ahill
;   ?''Oij 5
.! l;b: 1
..
iiEi :i; r
r                                ..7
''
. \OIYJ,C:L;Ac#drhjl;irCI;Y:Srigjjqi# I
..., 
ich85fi6: oloD9 ;
a li' 
, j
 I
`
c
r                                                               .,.   ::::P:;l: e
4r'..  ; ;.. . i I'
'' '. i:'



<pb n="127"/>
;              I 'I..`':           .   :   :  j
'...
i !
.ijl
1 ,i
:, :: , :\lt:,
I
 \
ibiti                             tSlrc;
I' '
? E.':l'C
:aeresa E.'ii.' jSjl;i.
1
,.Bi8 '
.: aost "-: _.
: 1... 1''
I : !::.;i' r.
''i.' 1.--. :
.L :!; PSICRL: :IPUBB 
: r
,,:  :r siks8t ::I ''
i,
'; aaa '; I' '
,:it SseLI da
f liLjj 
 Pi i ' 11 )
.rr : ..
 ''' ..1P;b
:d                         :r                             I'
iigi           .MLiZ!:        1
'qhf 4)baSi ilih :f  '
d 16;.! ;X]
ii: fii  I r
I ,. ,IE
f i j : i llI TSii;e1 :Oi  :ip
i:                 ;,i   1',!i-                              :i  
19P: n
: ;, r E:'''
ILO:Lhe' qpb:j ;
 I'igE5 IIWi 60. jri
 '';ffilb;: ;IPP(
1
1 t:sY$
 t
rpdaf
u aae TeB;
 :!iaa i
,, Si)
tfmi . Itae '
tbje1 :fSig.: Pp. f ItP1/
59e bairh.:.aci
ifi riB$: anwlt d
i:riQ*llf.. .se
el;i      ''                                           .sttl
pj-ii
ohile';grmlJtsliii3:-lbirlt .9rikj iL                    .
r i : 
    r ,
'::''' 3 '



<pb n="128"/>
'o    t             ,
cmtiniueda.           . .  .                ,
sWhat about It?     .t, young gay,, wih a
shrewd eu  ooiiofpi        d     the knowlede 
ehe  !',    T .
7io              smi,4  he poc eeded  t read 
"Lit enb1^" ca l. ;nd
hae followting pa ,            '
*'  eontiini~ed.  ,  ..       ..             * ;; 
,It is r   tmoredtht;    of the te Prinees 
Zavieski has been fod, Wi*  $ate than the one whih 
was read after her  "  l&  i t Bsupermedes BY this
willthe enomouM      We 4ce      prince is be
queathied eqwUay~  y BR tq her gramntiece 
eatSihitdio (nad Udlient. the Hto.
Coemo, Bele I~slei,~'~6t ^^ ^  inamya " In"
" There.l 'Wbfc* *'#ar^   v  ,  r.-:. : I .'
Yuhir a hhr' .hued the      .l      fro e. i
p'.asoine,  '       thes'           aTPh ...i
1Com, I       e        at ia caniag for tef
last evening that took '*  t    houT , eare 
he comtunmicated' * ; a  X  which she 'had '  st
'reeived through a letter  lawyer, Mr. Peter P*aV  '
"Tha sthe news must     When and wme, and a
ude what dt-nnse~uo0S  this last will f^a~y'r he
quired Mr. Bellia le  '
IolUne: to d h m. i W 
"It iO the, thn  Oh, ialjie let H w happy 
this   tpce makes me   yor dear lke  Bt.w
did you not tell me this, s^.' y6l knew  e whe ' it'
entered the ro6m? I s houd 'l.tetght.you wolud ha
bnrt upon me with the f1Ovt erhelmed  e Oith
it demanded aOnmo Bel le Ige  t danc - .e 7 e
*                       ; ; , . . , - .~~~eye



<pb n="129"/>
''                                             :' '':''1
:,1:f i i ; : ii:
( ,1
i i               r.ci                                           repi!l, i
: 1S"F! 1,
'`
r ' 

, i .
i   9
'
IP c;;l;. i tLL, i '
t                                             ,
'I,
.

i.rcYCIP;Y71'Y: vp ;'a '''
!I ;ecrp;
I: ,. , i
''  
:.....,.... :
ic :;tsr
i
 i` , ,I

 ;BLL_U1(9;6
' tcl12I ''' tl ;i
.;$cBStj PEijQi cL , t I
"
:S
I
 '-; 
:alil
.1.1
II PT ' '
,.
r  .  I:
" i! -i;
 1
:i. .I;.
ti)
:i,
1 .
..
: ?SrLk i
5
: I 1
; : .?
' ': I
11 , , I
?; (i i!'.'

:    ..                           ''
':T`:i " .  :
:'B'r.  
'Bt;:  
;.ZTLWL; ill ;Laai
?:,'
fer''
?:. 1. : ,IC
1:1

I . r:3rql 1
i I
'1/
YsWd ODI r
;e( stiiaiiit; i
zr tpfU:j X"t:Cli i ;i
I
raa .4tiis I .. '' r 
Y: ? Bomb "a3Cc r(li
'"7`-  'L   Y  1                          '
<e
 and .II 'alG
!ICNJII i ;SYepBcl.ji(c:I .bnt: lj
1  :merrsgj (1W I
i: Atxce ''
r, :r 
 r,
i,
I 
: :I
:I            i    ij3   '          ,f                           '   ;'r)' .. 'u:
. :!i
LCKhh(l                          '. "" ,                                    r



<pb n="130"/>
in       A m-^U.H"T
i9h oeiW l  good             ha.t ii waut e"
The last  eetivon asa 1Are    to MiSe  Piod, who had
put herad into the door.' ;
'If you please, sir, it is  adier from the government
houe. Be has brogh   a     S  my mire' answered
the girl, as she walked *r:e t',e room and laid a folded
paper, in the lap of lie ta ' .    
eolime opened it andt : 
j obiw         os, Friday Monn.
BsouIB: Al is, oit  ", 'ive had a f   explaiaton
with Lord Seyres this i
Oh I he has forgive'      Ihas forgiven me like, his
own noble and magn^i
"Brtt I ta oveihe     :1sflorrow and hnmiTastionl
Fbr I know now throuf that it has ciaud
him how great myn i      rnY      thugh he is more
deepty grieved than                  ,hag once, for
given me, be  ill nier ^^   ^i        or look, eproach
me. .. ih m yl^             1i 3   that I have fallen
>o        ^ I   eat  his ^            neverts  never be re
"Oblt, it i& biftteri jl.ii     r a 
'he' hardest words lir .w ere e    thee:
ince yo  were m    r    ienr maidenr ane, to
whi     yon had no furta    ;'   mnst be qnMtly ie.
tiarrii~  by our chaplain'        your proper name.
Since thi was to happen,    ' *   that ita h  happened
,a the antipodes of  r  ^   i    It will sae w  both
much exposure and mortifla 
. s' ut we must not let th;e    young people sffer
for ur own misfort ur. i     or your poor danghter
and her husband. See tfe *e at           wis.  t i  less
emba-min- Iwfl see t           .' alnerd
Y"e8, Teo:he, those w 'erei:4.rds I I never loved and
honored hih so much as now :::io, oh, my odl! 1. have
forfeited higood opiuion aorw  .
"He halb wone out and -left me here to reeeivw you and
Coseo. Come at once and bring him to your por mother.
*  ;  ,                   . . ~~~^s   sB.



<pb n="131"/>
. .          .   .   .    ..,         ,s,;a ,
$.fi  how Como this 1teif you will, n p-eps
i ,   coe on, for w    i  to  e ad hear
. ^ <  ihedl and folded the etter with.a .deep igh.
1^;;lon4 note, Iny .t l Wio is it from and
whait  ;it  out-if I may be pbmitted to ask youa  You
need iot   .   unless you like" eid ient. Belle Isle; in
a gi: :tantering tone, forth young fellow felt very
ligay, wae                  t leover his unexpected inheritance of a for. *
'ft.*  :r my m!oth-from the .Visoionntes eyre. She
wan !i"iinediattely at the governu .t; hou*.. And voa
will eiiWt i: ne thee, if you please, dear," aid Isohe,
wit:h l   embarrassmeut.   ,           .           ,
.".eiinlyt I shall be happy to ee her laysahip at last
Do om'. w        ?rI have never bd the honor of setting eyes
on the isontess' face ?"
"I kmoW'" ansered rsoline, in a low tone.
'But, dArlng, why do y6our thoughts run upon your
dear mother q periBienUy this mornin?     Twice yon
have sai4 miiothe? and corrected yourself by subetiluting
viscowniitb or Lady Seyres" 
"There wa a good reason for that slip of the .tonbue,
which I will explain as we o on, Oosmo  re i  Isobne,
in a gav tone 
'"s the viscountens lit ,or' mother in appearancem ?
persisted the lieutenant: 
'Very like! You migh tl    her to be the ,same w
an," rplie is wife.     ",.
"Do you know I hav. oft.  thought so ?
''Thonght whatP"   ,.'' '               .   '
CThat the head and fM  . the air and fmane anh gait
of Lady Syres were strikingly sugeslive of your m other.
I never saw her face to fade, how r."
"You will see her face to fae this morin," said
Isoline, as she (idldy arrayed herself in  at0 iJaet and
gloves for her ride.                 ..
Cosmo escorted her downtairs to to tj pvement, on
which th:arriage   romi the govwnment ho     awaited
them.               .                ' 
|; - -    eiTl /t h'coachma to drive slowly. I  ish you to read
.,. : ~''"  ',,  :
..'       '..'  ." ,



<pb n="132"/>
'''! ''',' :"
.. .1 1';1
: ir ;
:'I:: `'''
': :. : : i 1! :4 ) ''Li
G:. ::1 :f ...,,
1.. I
i          :
.sii :i pdii r!l .I 1.:
I : 1: I
'' ..i :
ic I r
sii a4Rsa.
r ;,
i .( x
;: :ill
..r I: l.aief611::sss, );jEhp
-r Iiig i ,: .Ffigid; !1 'S:,,;J
:'Pl!ic ii:
jbt of gcqt
:ft(i . ' ; t 4
,
iiai ;
iflQjj                ;I
ii mrt ierildt;laMli. 
'i ;u ame. ,..e,.,i.
j :'II Pihb;
`' ' ' r : Iptkbtj: 
i' ' i ijrL
'''                                                          "
;`Slli''
i;: ;il dro;
',I                  '''
;T, s
n I t                   ''                               I'         C'rSOI'
i 
i rrtdvi
\; C!. r . 
(Y!I
. :l'j r c111
L':i
:li\' 
  ' r II\P a ::
:::I
:U ;:) .
,'' :  ' ' C:l .i;i' '
'.i I ,ql,: 

r  Ilil. ;: i'
'''
I "tYkaL ::; 
I II
?.                              P1
i ''' r? :'mil h
: :1; rt,
! I
!: ':           Ciib      it3$i                             !:cl'f  i
i (I
a i . I r: C6;'0
,r . : !: f3iI
 I ;.
r if, ;)4LI?'I
"""""""""'""""""""""
I
a-1- 8)be llC8i4sF;':c

*ar
I Stomber ai' i
I r;
I r
 tdrieli6'lar!iciip; j;&cde:'fffff
(ar :: '' i
; ;
3;itia; fti '''i
.s. ?: 'b
r.                                                                  *.
U(: ''I L
: i
"'' ::
7                  ,  ;5
r :
I:. I
u : !ix
  ;  :r, ::



<pb n="133"/>
'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i
bl~~b~
t'" 1 ~  )'4!&i~   I  e:"
,   rl,      V.
*~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~j .  I
I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I
I  *  *,.  ~   *   2...  7
.,,,,~~~~~~~ .*.W .~ '  . 



<pb n="134"/>
s.                                , '  .  '        7
not, tro     bW ht by wd ti p           bl' ~     i
doing 'o. She has suffered so mxhe"                ^
"Ii the miidt of all things Xfel reme iber that she
is yo  mother, desrest  1   Wl  be a guane that
n'. word or deed of mi n4 .ij;ure Lady SerEBi' iOr
plied the young huband,~ a i.e handed hia wife, from 
the carrisa.   .         ..                  .  * 
They were received at si W  door by the ams e tom-
pou porter and con~'i t!  ie grad stacase by the '
amne footm~ . who' had .    Io ne on her fit visit.
This man led the Cti        of double doo i on the.'
right of the landing o        anounced:' :
"I. and. Mr. Belle' 4wi    eIred. - 
The yong pair fo^n    E        in a   ll eilegant 
drairoo, upholtie            .wood and rose-colored 
sil^ axd ado~rned 11with irt  rsee. 
On a sofa at the f            ' Lady Seyres, m i
mouring dres of *hit;        'tr      Iimed  th 8swan  '
'S do     withon t lnwith ! ^  ' e iatever,  nleas  e '
little Mary" 1tuart <  o<'ato  l   threSd tla  t
tyovered her        *    ^ .a     be cned :a  i
er face was so deal              of t    e t e4
osloras her coetmne. -. : 
She attempted to .r"rs e   lie  visitors, butt i -,
mediately sank back ha    f     . '       , 
Cosmo and Ioli neb ae         side, and ea1-ook .
a hand  of hemr    s.       . *""'*, f , ' ' '  '  , ..' .*
She attempted to ad It'     li.it her voi fatered .
into inlence.     '                                7
The tio yonIg persops i(    bg on each side of
het, gentl hlding each s *  i   e, cast down their i
eyes; they cauld not look 10 in her hInati ota 
could 'not endure their ga.i  'fe       r 
"Sit down    at length        the lady
They    d   and reles        d, and dre cbai 
p to    side And seated          o    onher right, t'
Isoline on herltt. 
Isoline has told   aI  aa'e   lady in  low, tone,  |
tiring to the youn man.L
1"All," answered tee latter.  '
hat do y    t  think of me, Liet.- Belle rl Be a a
; .  . *, 
. *  *  *.



<pb n="135"/>
net aed, in, a low monotone, ,ade steady by great ef-
fort'. .. ....,
It was moat    6lpbiveutln to wch the young
man did it at once    ly
"ou ,uy                    . terYo t  may as well tte
it as harbor it  Wh  do t yothink of me" repeated the
lady.
"I tink, ithen," began the yng man, in a grave bat
gentle tone, 'I think that you have -offered, and that you
have yielded to an almn6t .iresibleteitptatloni"
"A qite~ i*reistible one. X eould .ot help myelf, Cos-
mo Belle Isle. No woman.wa.; ever placed in so horrible
a dileroma as ,I wma p1ut in by  'aunt's first, capricious
and nmo;t cael will. She hd no moral right to mae: such
a will,, whatever her legal power might have been. I was
her nxtof kin, and her only living relative. I was the
natural and legal heiress to the whole of her vast fortune
If she had died in   ate I shoud have, inqeited every
penny of her millions. She had no right I isist, to make
my celibaey the sole condition o my inberitane of that
estate, which at her death houd have been mine uncondi-
tionall. and of right .'What do you think?" she uddenly
dewnaide  tunin, i   a defiant and agge ive manner
from one to tbhe      of iher isteners 
"No, she had no ight to make ech a will,"  id Coo,
without hesitation. 
Isoline ,id nothing.
"I was very young, c     beai     ad ,an s extremely
warm-hearted. I was in ove ad-I was already seeetly
married, wen the prieess frst told me the nntral,
cruel, monstrous termte of he, first will. I was shoeked
and terrified beyond mea re. 'I had always been ld to
believe that I was the legal h es of the princess, and that
I should naturally and unconditionally inherit all her pos-
sessions at her death--that they were mine by righ.  Was
not my assumption a natural one?"
"Quite so," replied Cosmo Belle Isle, who seemed will-
ing and even anxious to agree with the errig 'and humili-
ated woman wherever he could truthfully 4o o,
"What comd I do? I was till at chool at the epene
of my aunt.: My young husband was still at college at
the cost of his father. O  marri   thagh legal and in-



<pb n="136"/>
dioluible, was, , t, but a toi'ml one, enteied ito o~ y', 
to bind u to each other -t lt i t be sure, in separati i,
at' wf belo4ged toi eaeh gwther.-nd nduly to be mo r m-t
mated 'when we. shoild be abtet. 'et up hotsupekwig to.
~geit r  What culd I do?'      g'et tiy marriage toiny M
*Dairal kInswoman and b. turd into the tret to beg 
or stave? And bring dqW' te anger of his lthter upon :;
myboy: hiband? Itask y tu  t clid I do ?" 4eianded  '
te: lady again, taring ' y<  '  :,*omn one to the other of 
the young people besidhe ar.,'                    ,
Coboi'made no t.we ;'t,:. '- '.':  . ' ':  '',,.
"That is pieisellyw!":  ,'.d 't4o-+nothing t That ,i to ,'
say, I made nO confelmo '. f i. :yriage at the time, bn.ut
went back to mIay acaoi, a4 .bri n spending my muid- 
v. u ner vFacation with  y  wi ;* ,n she told me of this.
rbeT    will-and raje matetff*eit I grada Bted    ,
XI hve told all thiki!,    .'o '                - ',
, '.lglted  the;: y.a        '      '          ; 'i
aCilistiates 0aet   woiiebe i me to conceal my mar
riage, hd favord 'wto                 g yn .ealment , fr,. 
fmy annt, both w'ile I l''   ,ol and after, I bad- 
let to join my. ^             f    And every t'year
that p."e dide^ 6  tll            ore easey aidd the, '
confe'tion mere:, t   *            at legthimi,  .
p0.6*1)10  AU this Ihae       tflly expa tane tt
my daughter bere. *       ' ;  ,    .            '; 
idhod, kept my snec h    '         of t  prince? ii 
hbliy sm amairys,  o a            no longr   : a 
twofl4d 1.,: X had to die A         Irvinei nder
'to life a the heiriee  of *t1 <;  ZavieekL, I  - o
m.otree^ (t ti~p ardou oabl0e *%i1 lsay,* MdeSthe
lady, and sr-: uanflaal d  ri 
"ai o.t   d   horrible,         gtly atnsweredi 
. d 6r b** O m           A :  '*  :,  .  , *, i  I  ,.y
"An itwistine, as I osid'a", " said the  y    m- 
:ZphtiCally. '"I idM notuZ belie fimt yom, an alit t et  2
btood, had any rihth to succeedd the ne t  '    '
have inherited towiditizoalla by right, bnt taI 3 tl ' 
tfeit by the coifeadioa of my marrige; and  ot onIy  I



<pb n="137"/>
shold  forfeit the ortm by 0su  ai conesion , but e
loae the little i~mew.' thatad b een alo~ed me by ay
aunt. '.Yo perceive that my case* wa a v hd baone."
"It am bard,"  gI8' T..     , . i.  . 
"The saternative set beo  me *us this: on oC e h'a'
the inherita~e' of enoW rmou weJah., y oQwn. rhtfl
tone, at the price of the ppi   of my mi,  which
was nobody's bua7ssee; o  ot hef b)id, the loas of my
just ieritase wh abomte eticatio for myeif aml
daughter. Doyoaeee     ,     .     .
"We e,," T aweth te ytoiiF.~u ! e.ople, in f breath.
"Do yo woAdr thiat I che  the  lt serratTve; that
I choe, iwealth and  g  to iPe nt ad, my vrog?
I Bimnjtgd deathas Ms  rsal  iie   I danied and
enjoyed my 'ighl i' itima  a; MTis;t  Smit  Did I
do so t ery :o ag? 'pet me, bothi of 1yon" eclainue
the lady, vbo had' g b.e h.re .into state'odeice
"I am not   , n yo r  dge , -Ladly So^'eymTeel" cmao,
Belle Isle i a gr8 , quiet tone,,
"I oteoirfaa the wsct ceusure df you w ods, sir,"
said h    y, co-aly.- Th  turng t 'her dagher, she
inquired;:1 *  *  * -..  ..i  !  ' *
"tiO  d  yo s   ' "   .* '  'l "-,,,  ', *  .*  .:'* *:
"OhQ, war;O, do :nota ak ,me,.deat  It i not lor me
to criteiie' yo," Yer Ioine , as th c'rimsn tide wept
over: hr 'ime!, ec   .        the. ~'e.;  .   ;
"Ye y  do i;yw  hea*rtboth criticise and jlde;
me    Ay; a, T i   1       WR I ws not ttery helf isn  .
what I d4l,, X       'Aale': so' u1   for my dad tet, I
founded a   l asymxu f or  edai,  setiate mdea,
I made handwm e d.otigns'erly every pube ,aifty
in Ldond! A' , Cao3 dIwp only *aiting BOp1 faiit-
able opotunityr of di- .i frte with oa.-.t b.
cause , reooggieed yfriiglt ito sy portionf it*, b m-
ply becaus.te  whole bha  'lmW'.d to yoea,:, W   im-
Justly, on. c  irta.in i   Do        it
"Certainy, L"ady    . e.  wo-id ne,~os .to mtwe
to do,: W tt..rd tplid' the yw. .            ' pa
my pslan. i 1 told the vioount that I wii/~ d ,,. divide my
efrtune with CmoBlle Isle, who  a , nd-nepnh
of the Pria  Ale.diPr Zayiaslkivt r lu'.em the I " 1l



<pb n="138"/>
band of my grldanit, and from whom her wealth h
first come. Lord Seyre entirely approved what he termed'a 
the juatice of my in tion." 
"And they were just, deare~  m   s 1v " exclaimed Iso-  '
line, who seemed anxiou to asqe any good opportunity of
aeeing with her mother..   ,     .   .
,AU, yes, but the unexpectd  eeting with:my daugbter
on the deck of the Austra ~w , wand her fixed, immovable
resolution to reveal my s, o. to.her husband, and of an'.
other on board, who had k ownme as Mrs. Benerse Irvine,
and from whom I could .t     ve permanently conceaed
my identity, fortalled a   y plans. I pleaded for and
obtained a delay of the   ainsuntil we should reach
Hfobart Tona, as we did, er    mBorning. But, Coenoo l  ;
Isoline! had that revelatio , e^made before the news of
that eewond will arrivead.       have ended my ering     i
and unhappy life by   i              should have ie
by my own   hand i" id "' .  y      'lr. y,
!solne shuddered so tish gydt Oosmo put his arm
around her waiwt to SB ,,iJ      .. -                   ":'
"That blessed .seco  wi':Loie  d   and executed i    .
the spirit of justice, ma   .     with one exception-
one itter exceptio-   t      F   ' put h   ent through
life; my husband, .my h.              st honored h-     ^'
band, has lost his respeLt   if    e is merciful, he is  -
charitabe, he is affect* : no longer conding. 
In his high sense of honor i4r      my falt ih great
severity, even while he t .  twi.vitenderness. Oh,
childrep, it is hard to lose ,tie.^.  of so good and noble
a man," said the viscountese '.'mre agitation than she
had   b yet rayed.     a     '     :                     .
,oh, nmamm   ma  es mmal you'^'  recover his esteem,"
said Isoline, with emotion.  ., i..
Never l"  exclaimed the vi'     es. "Never in this
worldl Life is too short foarb t  .-a workl I have his
love, for love cannot be destroyd '~  an hour; but it is no 
longer just the same-no longe the love of an honorable
man for his honored wife, but t" love of a compasionate
man for the errig woman who,.. 'legally bound to himl
And, ah  in his strict itegri    he annot even find the  '
slightest excuse for her fault.;  e does not find impending 
destitution and irresistible tempttion any excuse for my
.                                 s.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~''



<pb n="139"/>
'A   ti. '     O'.i  A      kT-   ,' 
ri  f o; f conduct:.  Ah 1 ity pnniohment, like Cain-   is
h      i .tha n I tin bearlt :
.;.iy did not answer. They could find nothing to say.
q    :,fi^'t  'too well that,'he spoke the trdth.
'.  tviseountess then aroe. and touched the belL.
Serve refrehments here" she said to the man who an
sered the summons.
He drew a round tale up to the sofa where the lady
reclined, and near which the two young people sat, and theh
left the toom, but speedily returned with  waiter, on which
was arranged a ervie of chocolate, cakeF jellies, fruits and
other 4elic"ies.           '
"Yon may go now. I will rng if I should require you,"
sid the viaeountees to th footman, who immediately reW
tired, closing the door behind him
.'Draw up to the table. We must take sometbing to
keep us up. The viscount will be here presently. Isolne,
pour out the chocolate. I find chocolate an excelet seda-
tive to the nervous system,' said the lady, as she received
from the hand of Coemo Belle Isle the cup that had been
led 'by the trembling fingers of Isoline.
While they sipjed their chocolate, the vicountems, in
some embarrassment, entered into a further explanation.
As I hinted i my letter to you, Isoline, my good hu~
band thinks that inasmuch as I was married to him under
my maiden name of Smith, to which I had no longer any
claa, instead ot under my  idowed name of Irvine, which
was my only one by right, it may be necessary to inst~ue
the Iegaihty of our union by having the ceremony performed
over sagn under my proper name. My lord has take
partly into his confidence the chaplain of the regimet,
who will attend him here in a few minutes. The atair
will be quietly gone over here in this room, with only you
two as witnesse."
As the lady spoke, she,  for the service t be, taken
away.
"His lordship's compliments, my lady, and -h. is ready
to wait on you," said the servant, as he took up'the waiter
to carry it out.                 .
"Say to his lordship, with my respects, bth  *e are ready
to receive him," repled Lady Seyres.
The man bowed and left the room.



<pb n="140"/>
n  : I ,I
,.,,i
Yjj t,,r:,,r -rI'.n6:
'j r. r
.:?n!ptllr:ci .:lfi'11
'' I:1 
1 i. I
 i;il '''
i,
 i.' I ,
I'       Ir                    rr  ,
I
:x
::
c:
1Q
'? Ll'e  . !
iii

: ,
,
,! :..
''''
:?  - 'I
,,  : I ,I:
r) i
(I)                                                         i(r:!Yi
 ?, '
i.,.i.:..
''
=!r \
sjl I ,
: i
, .IIYIIILRUIIILI:-
?
rC i r. I.
hl I:
'''' " ' '
I`'.P1 '.n '' '':' :'l'r''.::I
:c:,, ibr
,  : . r;
:i::!
..
Li4.
:i
.;
"' s!:
'' ' '   :.i..,..r
L1
..
I:.
..... .:
I i is
'n
11 ,IdeP6;j r
I, st''i
r, '''bii: i,  I;;Pb
I Ittc
rlr
'1
'I :
,  I . !Yi: ,jlt8 i 3ij
': I'  ri 
:,C1Y 1 '?:
.' r
'"` ; i: ;s   ,r I I ..,
I
il ,,
IS'l` .u;l H r
'I I ;
"3::I:.
3, i'
;; "
I\'i'.I;'' 'jli                                                i  ,       I
''      "                                                                ,
'' ''' '' I
X                    i                                             r`
 (
'' ' ;. J I
' i'ill
 ?. I,
ct i



<pb n="141"/>
'i
I' 2.i
J! :' i.I
II .1
.. 
i' ( I. 
: I
1. 1
.i
fei
.:
I'PPcEFIZ- Blll'i
1.: ()tji(
I Iljillj,1.
rii 
,ca
 I,
;I,;C#PPt;b Jqi :!ii5 ,:: Ll'j:q;'ili!;, '' ''
jLk' iii Zf-bl; t; i: !.;
b          !'3
ii i II'i .e   :
, ; ' '
 eti,
I 
'a)b
,, 1. ::ta
              i);*. :                 :
i' I.
i Pe I,
:                                                 lir
"'C
..1.
i                                  ii
r I .iE'' C
i?'
?i  
FiLU.-.*b:.r'l%.:...,ca i 1:
' '           i8i      1.'E .
'' ' :::r\; i
r.,r
It
ii 1,:
::i
.1 'F . .I;
i.: r. : 
Id:; *::b;l: a r :
iSiPh?; ''''ac
( c
:
i;l i* 
 .'1 '' yi: r

1
flie :'
kv-; :$c, ,
Irl
t,
iane:i
S'VYduir.'Z)L' .ILZY CIUILIL'. bY aYV.r
Lad:! Fa;9
?'
BelBsl;'                          Pqbi'l                                                    r
I .i
!ir .I
: 83j Gtieir ,
r,
t iur( ...:
moi 5a H1. r; .: .. IpeI.
c        I             .i..           . It                             :,
'''                  ' '
I, i. . ..,!: 1., ' '
"' ;I '"
 ,*1 (.
'''
.u.. ,,
r 
1  ;    .  .                         ..



<pb n="142"/>
H4B          A  v TlkTuKD                ' EART         |
At eleven o'lok they took have and eturne4 t
boyal Victoria.                                  *
A few days after this Isoline joined her husband ai
uarter in the barrack, whih had been fitted up .OQcn
ort     and even humrioudy eefo r  reception.
CHAPZTER XV                       |
ISOUNB depended mu,    or society on the ladies of th  ;
regint, and there wre i    gfood many of them in thes 
Hobart Town barrack   .. 
There were the wife and'.he grown daughters of Col. ;
Newton the wife and two daaohters of Surg. Boggs; the
wife and one daughter of Chaain Ea&hodes; and th  wies 
of the other staff and linm 
The colonels hou9e  a * hadi-lme  edifice built of the
native dark-gray freestonp, rif ia nonizhinga garden and -
conervatories; the ofiicer' ::iri  were neat and con- 
fortabe.            .                    ;
The ladies sooB inzgu      wg ly sociables to be held '
in rtatio at the ho e it  elontl and the quarters 
the principal officers. Thia  e   amongh themselvee; a
strictly garrison arrangemiet 4&  hich no outsider - were
invited to ake part; and   oi    on" were of the aim- 
p   onoleat fotnn T6 fog. peooqebple and cards for
the a od oes, anil- a;n Eiu  mvteP  hlent of tea and
cake for all 
Besides the barracks sociable t*b ladiee had a limited
circle of outside acquaintaz~  aoing the families of the 
civic and coloiiai officers.
TTpoa the  hole, the odt   English bride found -the
other end of the world"  i  more habitable and enjoy-
able than she: hd expected to do.
Not so her maid; ona Pond.  ince thir arrival in the 
colony the girl' sprits had drooped and continued to 
droop.    ,  .  .   :             ., 
One day, while heo was in attdasnee on her jd:tM,    '
the latter said:                                  '
.  ,.  .  .', :
~~~~~~~~.   *. , X



<pb n="143"/>
A TOR&TU'Ab HE.ART                  110
Itg     s me geat distress to ee you so depreed in
spirt, Lona. You seem to be very unhappy here. What
is the matter?  Tell me; I m       yor friend. If yoa are
hmnpspek and wish togo back to  nglkrRd, we will promu
you a passage in the Becnal, that is to touch here on her
voyage to England from Melbourne, at the first of the
month. You have only to speak. Would you like to re
turn home by the Bengal f
No, madam. Why should I wih to return home? I
came out here because I had no friends left in England,
and you, my young mistress of many years, was coming.
I have you here, madam, and I have no one in lniglindI
Why sould I wish to return?",
4Thfe if you are not homesick, Lona, what is the mat-
ter with you, my girl? Confide your trouble to me and
I wil help you if I ca" said the lady, in so kind a tone
that the gir suddenly broke down, burst into tears and
wept heavily.
tsoline waited until her maid had eibausted her par.
oxysm of emotion and then repeated her question.
"I will tell you, madam, since you are so good as to ask
me," murmured Lona, as a deep blush rose to her brow.
"You may remember Ham G(ow-he who was falselyao-
~sed of 'the murder of the young Earl of Hawkewood-
falsely, indeed, madam, for be knew no more of that rime
than I did."
"The Hawkevile tramp? Yes, I remember his name."
"Madam, he was well eduated and well conducted, a
t'bugh he was poor and peoplecalled him a tramp. Now,
& nriceh gentleman walks all over the world they call hi
.,.' estr~an, and praise his athletic strength and en-
.' 'e  ; but if a poor man goes afoot fron place to place
',.  1   him a tramp and commit him for vagran    If
Qo w,, who walked from village to village bease he
' ~   jt. afford to ride, was a tramp, then Id Lolim,
f!/  d hfrom Calais to St. Petersburg becauhe like
1^ '    his legs, was no better. I beg your pard  r
" free, madam."
;<" '.yj eadily excuse you for defending, yor yr
F l    '~^..  But what abont this ma,        ' ..^.
:;h1e ,uand I were engaged to be'auriedn      .
'     T    ,a.ecleimed the lady in dismay.     i
, . , ' i ', , 



<pb n="144"/>
; a :`;'.i.:. '' C '''I
: : '' 'II II
r r
r ;':' (' , 1.
 .,  n
;::) ( i 1 :Cl::i i' b, ;'BP
'' I
1 :: ''L
 i:
.f ; ,9p,.
L`X_ 1;:I
; , ,.  ,: (rli;l,l!
i:T; ''
S
.: itP
.i ,.u
,                                                          ;;  '-I
:s;aeiHisbf ,,
i5;itee6r  ,.11
I ; ,.. iRipgi;
 ,a
;riat
1 ;I
:;
I' -:
'I '
-''' 
'".;:d
..isniI'
F'rJo!
,, In;
,;lt  : .;
':                1.           ,                                                     I"
i' 
.1.                                                                                       :ai  
t91 e ;I ,i
, ' 'bi ;i64tl :1,
 ':llL
r, i
'1' :
r
: ::. ':
I;' ' !Jillli ,. I I
I .. IriPr
:;""                                                                   r            I   i:
' II!z'''',I
:5 1\ ki

'I'"il" ;. :Y
"\
Lrl :a;ibitb
I':!  
r! ,'' '''
"lis!
, Ir Irp esi
:,a:1 ..I
i
ru )
r :`2, 1
. (PjE:-;Yt8 ,I
I i
' '4'a
t ''
:;:,":: ' ' i ' bbl;l;-7
z C
!:,I
.
t               i                                 ld;                      I
i?1.;
 .r
'`:";" .. '?R: ..
:Iti zbdr r
rihDd
I\I F 1;!;!

: I'
.   " )::
:  I  ,
' L
"
fi  'r,'i:.  '                                                :jtir
r  r I r, .cil:i   ., lg
r                                         ''
  \ .



<pb n="145"/>
:q ,,              ,, ,:           r      Y     ,,'I II:
I!
!I                ' '
, !jrl
..k f- r.
;                                                              ' '
i; 1! I ::
-arsag:'ippp:.y.Dlsrr."
'' ;'' " ,\I : ' :. .sl:
i; 'fr
.;Y : ;
:i
dfiiB umas?l;i;4sr
gk :
:rl:              ,,    sarb               ''';  ':                     r
.III
I- .;
."                  PBte
)
Zle
r:         ..
J, 111:
,I i r:
II
Y., :i!
:tii TbiI:
Iai
n;ss]keiic_d6c:
;a:
blti iil4Si13isa... :' .j
:: :'" "
..,, ' '
 '' $:
:
:'*9, \
L1 ' '':
:I! filal ;
I! ., ,
II i: Si ....
I; :I
qt ..
J
I i? i i
1 iilllY '
;f ''
'' Ite
; ;.?
:i YJ(
1; iepa. '.
'i ',\
ibeo;t*h;r .]i
I; ' ' '
rsfber L1
(
fo.go f;dItZBfO:
r 
1. . I
lifle '1''  ; 1P :191
:li:and tbayosbl          1Jaesei       . r;Lia&
'bexp natai! II
Wh08 : ' '
daPada :odl
!eit,(t;o;tlkti 9' 1
m
btn 
tcs I'; a';Mi? : \
; (1'
il: :'
ca.. r .
.n (2: , r
L;7Cr'l ( :"
I
;   I                          rB. i '  .



<pb n="146"/>
il^, A,,-o 1RTUJ|D                A ,, ;1r
.e,1 raimimg hi eyes to the sitpedous precipice.  t wtiih"
he mounta e aide wascomp e;. . '   .
. ,"Yo  have hit it this tir:Bele  le Ie" exclaimed En ^
Bia Norrwood. .'    ,,  " '.*'i '     * '
"What do you mean?"' inqied the lieutenant.
Struck the very pupi. fthe bull's-eyet" ,added th'e
"I dont umderstand ^    iid4 Mr. Belle Isl e.
"Don't you " laughed Ni  ood.                     /
" Thero' 'a w m g  i &baft at random st     i 
Finds mark*a  .i"er never meant." '       ]
"1 wish you would e           l     Nrwood" sai&d
the lieutenant.       ";- ,^ 
"All right. So I ^        obseved, did you no, that' 
this savage wildeies M   O le    ipenetrable woodof
the sleeping beauty-o tor: t   at effct-did you not ?";'
"Yes, but.,whalt.,t    '  .   ' o f
"And I aid tlhatt..ye'                            '
You did; buntw  it        u                        g"
~ "Just whwt at 1  ut it This .foidayd
thicket is a- wilderees  t       the palace of ian epnS
chanted beauty.  tl iwi           : om    ee
the ensign, solen  .,nly ..                        . .
"And now you speak ,         ;" said the ReT. Mi. i
."Not at all. I am spea        itruth, as I will eooiv
prove. Follow me, .getl         ladies. Miste  hodes
let me lead your horse.         is not safe Jut " ier no
Bele Isle , keep close tQ M .s  se's side. Mr. Rhodes,: '
look t miadm's horse. Ti4ae    A t the boulevards min4
t you;' Iaughed the young  eis he led the way Jown u
dark, deep. avine that in  a    suggested to a reader J
of Dante    entrance to    iial regions. 
eevpeer   , derker the aet, until th     eeme 
leave dayi'r jfaeind ithet :    ,
This r       v ,ravine wound aroiid the bae of the moun- H
tain for a ;ile 'r more, and tha  doubled upon itslf, anit
almost impereeptibly wound upwards toward the light;.
until between the steep eides of the deep and nari pa, 
-glimpses of the bWi sky could be seen ome.dm , 
.... ''?,%.'



<pb n="147"/>
:aL , ; . ..,
.Higer and higher wozdM the ascending pass nowr,. til
at length they came ot 9it:t iA e top of the 'nwriiw ,pon
a plateau, from WLhei.  a Tat. panorama of exceeding; mar-
velous beaty, radine? a  ond pblimity was spread out before
them.           ,               .
An exclamation of imaeieat and delight burst imul-
taneously fro  the wole pity.
Wooded 'bill a  vatleyb ii  all the glory of their many-
colored autiw n  oliage;  nd in. all the splendor of the
afternoon sinshine, rofned away until they melted into the
purple munmtasiu, whosiesnlit summits were lost in the
miets above .the distat hOisn. Hete and there bright
lakes, like miirrors, set i .woods and vales reflected the
scenery of hills and elods. 
The party of explorers ;ted entranced.
Was this our earth, ora ome more heavenly planet with
more divine, scenery?, . .
"How came you to iscoer the labyrinthine pa    that
leads to this magnifient, view, ,Mr NorwoodP?'in.quire
Mrs. Belle Isle, in: a Voioe nbded by aw.e
"By a mere ch,  e       , one;af my solitary rides, madm ',"
answered the y     ofe    lifting   h at 
The party.was 1sl   i    spellbon-d over th prospect,
' .when Miss Rh iodes     Y iyinquired: 
t.,  "But wat: aboti. the;  oe of 'the sleeping  eauty .i
t, 'the wood, Mr. Noori o."  ; ..
,   Wit. . Whdraw your ga2 ,ow  bills and valleys, cloids dnd
jin ontains, and look dowX   below your tanding ground,"
one did as hb direted, and a cry  .surprise and
burst forth. \/., .  - 
1 ^  S    y   Cdown the tvnge' .iae of the precipice Was a
1 ueau, which seemed .a ,pedect Garden of Elen, in
*H5ed~ing bright beauty      f its. lofty trees, uxurihnt
BE;I ^pd lovely flowr. Prom the midst of thi gar-
-  1M      a {fairylike palace of glistening whit st ne, whoee
q t form seemed the perfectio.f rcbitectural
JI     u aon the terrible precipice. tr ' oasia in the
Bj.i'l:^l     den in Gehenna, seemed to 'te group of
[SH1~;~.~ were looking down upoait to be perfectly
I.^|1  r   above and from beiow.
s  1~~~~~~~~' . Ws'i''.
|~~~~~~~~2 d i pE":



<pb n="148"/>
1*           A TOUIUt3?4)i .UEART
"Whose plae is it?"' inuired the ohaplain. 
"How can it be approached?, askeld th, caplain's wif 
"How was it ever builtj and  plantet " *iired Missr :
Rhodes.            '           '
"Who lives there " questi~ d Mrs. Belle Isle. 
Ai all these interrogatorie, were put simultaneoly, they 
constituted a c00nalon si at rendered intelligent aiwers '
impossible.
"I do not in the least believ in the existence of thati 
paradise, poised in midai.t :.t i nothing but a .mirage, 
fata morgana, a .hlflii    on, an optical illusion--a 
painter's vision, a poet's d*em, but no reality i" said Lie&nt. 
Belle Isle, with his eye*a   . upon the sene. 
"You have ahowna  s ltelce, but where is the prin-
cem?" i~    ed the cb.p.'     . d.ughter.'
"Yes, whereis the pril        added Mra. Belle Isle. 
"Where should the slee,  buty bea be ut in some inner- 
moat chamber of the pWeltr aiting the kiss of the fairy 
prince to awaken her  re' tted the yong ensign. 
"Do you know twho own o^ ouies the srange place, I
Norwood?" inqiire: Ieiet' ,     sle 
"I know only whrat Ihr' It.l  able to pick up in the [;
town, and that is very  tle  i .;ee.ms to be a cae of ro- ',
mauce in real life,   '"     y  tytr."
"Oh, a story " exclsliled  ip  ain's daughter.
S"No! not a story---that,  iii o one can get at the: i
tory, if there be one,' sia M 
"Wen, tell us what yc,. ':dTi    persited the yo~ng :
lady.
"The ma    who. owns   !<,q;   pine this palace in the. 
desert is named El ntr ld                Elfinstar, if we are,:
to believe ooxmon rumor.    ff B evd in the colony abot :'
three years ago, with no t fo. : r family, a few Euglish .i
servants, ad/ plelty of ioe.'. :e selected that plateau "
below us and built that                     ' i  ' es','
"Why on earth shiuld au ia l f means have chosen such 
an extraordiappa ianaoesible site for hia ,
dwelling place, ,e there aei so many beautiful situations:  '
in the valleys and al6bg the banks of the Derwet?" in-
quired Belle Isle.                                  : 
"No human being can tell. Yet yo   cansnot deny tihe,



<pb n="149"/>
1'':^R             O r- ART          14.
hof the pe, or the iyneqp*led grandeir
' w .     ' .replied to:roo. :              . . 
. ii.  in- the name of .agi oola the building ma-
P e been conveyed hthit ?  The whole thinglooks
11 ;4Jeromancy."
;    a pa  fr'om the tfot of the mountain to that
Ii';Xt was narrow and tirtous, but Elfnstar hired
bor and had the pl  gr   into a practical rod,
[  . e foundations of the houe were laid  Everything
udnp by that road"
the interior of the hoe orepond with the ex-
1 :'magnificence and splendot?" inquired Mr Belle
K ,  human being outside of it knows for a certainty,
rhaps the convict workmen who asited in carry-
tJ.   and unpacking the furuat   BRumor says that all
,", ',bian Nights stories of oriental gorgeosnees are
/'ie within the walls of that white palace; bat no visi-
ij  a     .. lnB ever been admitted to its sanotuary to report its
'M hidden glories."
p. 4 Ancid do you mean to sa that the inmates live there
"'"I-  o'ltude; inquired Mrs. Bhodea
,^.^ '  ,nmates cannot be saidto live in olitude, for it mem
:iBi: have the society of each other; but they live in abso
att' retiremnt from the world--in the sumptuous, hxa-
retirement of an oriental  raglio."
.p exclaimed Mis BRhode, as if suddenly recollect-
eself. 'The enchamntd princessa-what about her?
"s.iid that there waa only te man and his servants
.o the colony."
l    ,. yes; the sleeping beau  in the wood.  el, my
I     %wias Rhodes, there i saMid to be a young lady, beau-
iti heori, iving in that p      dy,
^    .::;' "'Whether she be dark or bright
BI [  ;~~ .' '  ^Or little loved, or loved arighit'
. '"~ B,! cannot tell you," laughed the y  ung ensig
IB^^ .!t; o the people hold no oommnication whatever
a.      outstide world ?' inquired Mr. Bhodes.
' ,    .whatever'-with the one exception that proves the
is, once a week, when the mail ships come in,



<pb n="150"/>
150  ,       A  TORTU".,Ii)              ':      ' ,.. :
a manservant, hos nme      Is d' to be Stacl~ole,.w    '
down into the town, mails and receives letter frobm 4 i '
post offie, and iomeiimnea pte.s" from the ehip, or ptu..'
chaees goods in the tbwt , aii retdrns. But neither tiw
master or mistress of the uime the ygong lady, or .anJ;t,;
otherperson from the hemtge is ever ee abroad I       '.
"But do tell us more a.~  t the young lady, the  .fM
chanted priness, the leepi:b.buty, a8 you call her," per ; ,
sisted Miss Rhodes.. 
"Beally, I have told      that I can gather either f
fact or theoride. If I hadi' y imagation, I might inae
up a satisfactory tostry'  it her;but that might notb .?t
satisfactory," laughed the   g ensign.               '
"No, that *ould not e eat    tory. I havewa chld'yB
loning for a story, but with a ehild's stipulation that it"?i
shal 'be tre." 
While they spoke, the B.t s' whodes was looking up:f
at the sky,'and now he said:   :1 '
"The sun is ,etting low, my fjie""s; had we ;t 'bettl 'b
turn our horses bheas ho nward:           "
"Oh, yes " chmed :in  i       'I.;old not be out i '
this wild countr  after dwr,   " the whole worldI I allt
is true that is said ab"t thei ,iw  it would be very un
The two young ghirels    .      r, and the two youngl
'  en had nothing o   do but t   o       " " 
They turned aboit and    dd      the to rtouls il
nearly two hourn , before t  ahea   out at the b e base of tbe'.
mounain.                 '       '."                 ' 
'he sun was little more tawt ia   or hhigh,  d the 
had several miles' ride before': . But their horses.ha 
had a good rest at noon, hand *4hile they paused upon i
the plate*a, and they had cote ai  a walking gait through l
the mountain pass, so that they could be pt to a good '
speed on their return roa.d. 
-It was dtik whe te parttyrehed the barracks.
Isoline, being fatigied with her day's ride, le  her hus- ;
band in the courtyard nd went at once to her room,   ; 
There a surpri aiaited her.
Lona Poid satoep a low hassock, pale as eth ad 
bathed in tears.



<pb n="151"/>
*    ,      ; '   '   .   '  *   ' ,t
* A Or'ft*l'TEJRED HEART             1516
"My dw girl     What i the matter?    ave you heard
any bad iews?" inquired ]fM. Belle Isle, asshe threw off
her riding cap and went to the weeping woman.
"Oh, madam, I have seen him    I have seen hiim  ex-
claimed the latter, breaking into convulive sobs.
"Seen whon?" inquired Mmrs Belle Isle.
"Him.-*~y poor Ham 1' gasped the girl.
" Gow, do you mean ?" inquire the surprised lady.
"Oh, yes, madam I Ham Gowl My poor, poor, dear
Ham I" sobbed Lona.
"But-I don't understand   Where have you seen Gow?
And why are you so deeply distresed about it?"
"Oh, madam-when I went. out walking-this morning
_-afte  my work was done-I saw him-Ham       Gow-in
the chain gang--.breaking stones on the road I" gasped the
girl, amid suffocating  s and tears.
"A convict!" exclaimed the horrified lady.
"Oh, yes, madam, a convict, and-my heart will break 1"
wailed the nhappy girl.
:. .la.ement. 
CHAIPTER      XVI
,A -'OW AGA M, *
,',;,, :"HA  Gow a convict in the chain gang on these roads 1"
^v exalaimed Mlrs. Belle Isle* with a st-rt of incredulous
>'Oh, yes, madam I yes  I saw him, I say! I saw him,
my heart is broken 1i wailed Lona Pond, wringing
t hs iis quite imposible, my poor girl I You could
seen him    You were certainly mtaken. It
been some one else whom you took for him,"
i 'istress, speaking with confidence.   p
dear mistress 1 A  if I did not knw *tmy own
,       E'Ham Gowl As if I    cduld peiMy, mistake
[u.' _an for him I" moaned Lon.,
.dear girl, consider  Whenwe left England,
ago, Gow had not beearresed, though
irrant, out against him in   l directions, and



<pb n="152"/>
IM        'A TOWTUaO HEA              ' :BZAWD
lare.unBsfor        p appherinioni EHo,' thi,,  i,
he have been publcly triet  for any often*e, and 'la
and sent hither wiwhout h eig i dentif i ed a dd.  aie d u
a m      graver charge whicmit h      ti   tot. hai
soaflc   or without o  heaari  l aboU t it?" 
^Oh, madam, I do not kniow/   it could have been,/bt
I know it thas been doe; :.f I .toodo this aftenoon 
to aee, ith im in, the 'iwnm g on the road, pie M
the miserable sweetheart ofb th trip. 
"Xotia? I am sorry yoi wvnZ near the chain gangl X
wma no place for you to g". ; Bt ;  do not mean to reproam S
you, hild. . Tell me,. ohjiat'iely, how you cametei
walk im tit dietion, and ;et, or think yo met, yo
lover among the convict. t; wk on the road" said 
Belle I e . :.        '  ,'' .'.' .. -  ..  ... I.,le,
'" OI imadam, acfter yor had4 goe mry this morning, a
I had got through all ay wor IX fet lonesm e and 
hateb:d, e . Ipt on, bmy  nbon  aet .wl asd daled
the town, a  be ondthe bwn oir t on 'Maq.m'are ,'
and almost befor I iki   , eI cte pon the chain g
of convicts in the .yeullow *Uifptin breaking tones on 
: id ad half a       oz  ^o9 of Hiited contaiblee, i
. wblt, 'wating ieam;e IWa      stopped and sta
uncertain whetwh~'* toh*, bao o*.oast the rhole g
on, of them rabled hie             to hea  lid to hare 
dead oa the 'pt '  .Ite  I   i    .fi twHai 'row  v , 
^n, iedasm, it Wbl           it wae it e  oow 
- .* ;, .:" . recplgmlZe   yOa ?" * .  '.  : :: o R  .  t! r
t-1    ot know, madam, f  or thinute he looked he'
lo .e f the eotablee truc  hife the head and 
"Tbhelte i   interjected le"
"Ad   he ;dropped hi     I eys ' o.fid hatmmer and
over the head-ordered me to be off with mRyself I,
not want to be aeit:' to the house of oorrectioni inri
came home, and I have been crying ever ain;; o^':
'. .'.| ..;' .?? [~.



<pb n="153"/>
A   lUz  ir  Au W    A*T           1 
madam , Is butlitttle gd I m to you now   Yo n migt
as well t nm me of and sends me hoe." 
"Do yo   ish to.lea,    me and reten  to Bgli,.
Lona      ;   .. ..   , .    .       ,    . 
"Oh, no, madam. I do.no wish to leao: ou;you; youe
the only hope I have in this iold! Bit I am a trouble
to you, and so;perhaps you hid better send me away."
"I do not wiU to send you away, Lena, unless yon de-
sire to go. 
"Oh b,     'a   I have. e d   that I do not .wih to
leave youn of myself; and eiea ityou should tor me away
-whieh o' one woild wonder. st your. dog, miserable
girl that 'am--I sahld not retan to th old country --
not while my poor Ham is o:t oa rel I wold atay here
where I   iould see him ~ouelles, if it was only at a dis-
tance  I niavte noo one to go, to !glka m.t, ,ma'am I, All
I have are here! Oh, mnam!    ould I do anything for
poor Ham? Would they let ne see him to speak to him?
Would they let; me take. him tobacco oad bot b   do you
think? But, oh, ma'am!i perhaps you would not like to
keep a gi*I who .wa. on pesking ers wth a eonvict P'"
"Lona;/child, I do not know the prio~. rle, and can-
not tell whete you. would be allqwed to visit and help a
prisoner or not; bit I doknow it:would be your dity and
mirne, and every Christ , t' do all that we.can, or that
we may l:e permitted to ido' <r the souls and bodies of
these ,'poo, itce  'o., oit  said the l.dy, gentlfy
"Then yon would not *otBct to my going to see Ham
in his priscn, and taking hi things?'
"Certainly I should tnoi  oalI  But really I do not
think the mn you saw *as o, but some one like him."
"Oh, madam, s i I did nit inow my own yong m  anl
Besides, Ham had not a commeo face, that any other man
should look like him' ''     .
"Yt, Lona, other men did looklike him I So meh like
him as to be taken for him. Do you not remiber the
confusion caued by the contradictoiy repora broght in
about the places Haw Gow was seen at otn theisame morn-
ing by people who re  e    y were eaqay w ell  with the
tramp's personal appearance?'
" The three-am Oows' Oh, ye         rpl iede the girl,
with a wan smile



<pb n="154"/>
164          A TORTURED HEART 
"The fishermen, Abbot, Miller and Johnson, all 'goo  '.
men and true' who had known Gow from his boyhoo,.:
eetified that on the morning of the murder they had take  .
him in their boat, off Hawkeville, and sailed with him feo : t
the coast of France, where, a few days later, they leftij
him"                                                ' i
"Yes, I know they said so; but they were mistaken."  ' !':
"So thought the Rev. Paul Traverse, a gentleman of'/;
unimpeachable veracity, who had been Gow's Sunday-school 'i
and Bible class teacher for many years, and who knew hii\i \..
intimately, and yet testified that on the morning of thIi
murder he had got on the same train with Ham Gow and 1a
ridden by his side from Hawkeville to London, conversinmi
with him all the way, and that on reaching London he had'.
accompanied Gow to the East India Docks and seen hi'gh
on board the emigrant transport ship, the Golden Patl&:,
bound for Melbourne, Australia " "
"Yes, I know; but he was equally mistaken with the fis '
ermen," said Lona, with a strange smile.            :
"And so said and swore the Hawkeville surgeon, Dr..
Ellis, 'whose word is as good as his bond,' and .who de- '^
clared, two weeks later, that on coming from a night visitei
to a patient, he, early in the morning, encountered Ham"'H
Gow in the neighborhood of Stony Fells, our old hom,,;i
recognized the young man, whom he had known familiarly ?
from babyhood, and challenged him to surrender in tei'!
name of the queen, but only got laughed at for his paimnds.
Then he gave chase to the fugitive, who took to the thicek'
woods, whither the doctor's horse could not follow hin}'
and so escaped. Now, Dr. Ellis is just as confident as the 
others that he encountered the real Ham Gow!"       ['
"Deadly sure, madam, for I saw the meeting and the ,i
escape! Besides, dear madam, all the world may be miu 
taken in a man, except his sweetheart; but she cannot be t;
"It may be true, then, that this man whom you sa.i!;
in the chain gang on the road is your lover. He ma.Y
have got into trouble over here, and be suffering under i
colonial sentence," murmured Isoline, sadly.       .  i
"Oh, madam, if you could only get the master to iti  a
quire into it, and let me knowl" pleaded the girl, with  '
hands clasped and eyes lifted as in prayer.
"I will certainly do so, Lona. And if the man shotiad 
. ', ''



<pb n="155"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    155
prove to be Ham Gow, whom we all knew at home, and
if the crime for which he has been condemned to peal
servitude is not a very heinous one, we might get him
taken off the chain gang and assigned to private service.
We might take him into our own as butler or coachman."
"Oh, madam! If you could do thatl" exclaimed the
girl, as the shadow of despair passed over her face. "For,"
oh!" she added, after a few moments, "I know, I know
that my poor boy could never have been guilty of any
offense that should have condemned him to such a fate !"
"I hope not. And in any case, you know that in this
colony there are opportunities of reform and redemption
that do not occur in the old country, or in any other part
of the world, that I ever heard of. In Great Britain, and
in other countries, a man once convicted of crime and con-
demned to imprisonment and penal servitude, is lost be-
yond all redemption in this world, whatever may be his
opportunities of salvation in the next."
"Oh! I know it, madam I" sighed the girl.
"But here it is different. A convict need not be with-
out hope of redeeming his character; for good conduct he
can be assigned to private service, where his position will
be that of a domestic. If he continues to behave well he
gets a ticket-of-leave, and can work for himself. Later on
he can get a conditional pardon, which, with the exception
of privilege to leave the colony, is equivalent to a full par-
don."
"That is all new to me, dear madam."
"Is it? Why, Lona, some of the most prosperous, some
of the wealthy and esteemed men in the colony have been
convicts who have, with the help of the Lord, redeemed
themselves. There is a dark side to this fair picture, of
course. The convict, instead of redeeming himself, and
rising higher and higher into prosperity and respectability,
may fall deeper and deeper into degradation and misery,
and finish his career as an underground beast of burden
in the coal mines of Port Arthur, or amid the horrors of
that prison isle which is the ultimate dread of all felons."
"Oh! madam !" cried the girl, with a shudder. "Oh!
speak to the master  Oh I plead with him to try to save
Ham Gow from Much a fate    To stop him in that down-



<pb n="156"/>
156          A iulRTUt iED HEART 
ward road! To turn him about so that he may cotli;
again "!
'I will do my very best, and so will Mr. Belle 
know. We will even speak to the governor, if 
But, great heavens! my girl," sddenly exclaimed the1
brealing off from her discoure.
"Madam?" questioned Lona, nm    prise.            :.
"Only a psing thought     T will speak to Mr. B4u
Isle," replied the lady, recollecting and composing her f,|
as she arose and took off her riding gear and gave it t,
her maid, with directions to bring her a certain silk dre,
for her evening wear. 
But Mrs. Belle Isle's passing thought was this: Thfl
she and her maid had bot, in their eagerness to redeem
Ham Gow, forgotten that it was dangerous to call pubei'
attention to him, against whom there was a charge of mua...
der, of which, if he were onvicted, he would assuredly b6.
executed. 
If the man seen in the chain gag were really Ham Go .^
as Lona supposed, he could not be there under his reaI 
name, else he certainly would have been long ago arrested[,
for the muder of the Earl of Hawkewood. 
He must be there known by some other name, under,,.
which he had been convicted for some minor offense. A i^
if so, it would be fatal to him t0 call public attention to
his identity.                 ;           ' 
He might be convicted by'        eiC t.-r;al evidence, an :;
executed for a crime that he had never committed
Isoline was perplexed.                             ' 
Finally she resolved to be guided by the counsel of her'lj
husband, to whom, according to'er promise, she meant to b
speak in behalf of the convict          .            't
With the assistance of Lona Pond, she fnished dressin
and went down to the parlor,wiere she wa soon ioind
by the lieutenant.          ' 
She said nothing to him then of the subject that en ':
gaged her thoughts, for dinner was ready.  .          '
The young pair supped ie.-44he, as they usually di.'
Afterwards, when they.were alone together in the ptiri , , 
Isoline quietly asked the lieutenant if he remembered Hanm  i
Gow, the Hawkeville tramp.                            i
"As if Ishould be likely to forget him! Th1e getle.,



<pb n="157"/>
A 'TO 'crUtJIW     EART             157
man vagabond I The poor weth who was falsely charged
with the murder of his patron and only friend, the Earl
of Hawkewood I To be sure I remember him i" said Cosmo
Belle Isle.
"Then you do believe he was falsely accused ? exclaimed
Isoline, eagerly looking into his face.
"Of course I dol I felt sure that he was guiltless of
that crime even before I heard Volante's statement of what
she witnessed in the bachelors' corridor that night, and
which ought to have settled the question forever as far as
poor Gow was concerned. It was a shame that the war-
rants for his arrest, which had been scattered all over the
world, were not withdrawn after the statement of Lady
Volaete had been made public! Poor wretchl He had
grown up among us and had not a vice in the world, so far
as anyone ever knew, except his hatred of restraint and
love of locomotion-if they could be called vices."
"I am really glad to hear yoU say this, Cosmo, because
-because I have quite a difficult problem to solve now in
regard to Ham Gow, and I want your advice and assist-
ance."
"Ham Gow? Why, what do you know of him at pres-
ent, IsaF
"He eis sid to be here in this colony," replied the lady,
in a hesitating manner, for she shrank from telling where
exactly the poor tramp was thought to be.
"Here in this colony? What is he doing here?' ab-
ruptly inquired the lieutenant.
"Hte is said to be-working on the new road," slowly
replied .he lady.
"Working on the new road! Why, none but the con.
victs-nd the worst of the convicts-work there in chain
gangs," exclaimed Mr. Belle Isle.
"I know-he is said to be among them," replied Isoline
in a voice so low that it was almost inaudible.
"A felon I" exclaimed the lieutenant
"So i1 is laid."
"Who says it?"
"My maid."
"Lona Pond?"
"Yes."



<pb n="158"/>
158          A TORTURED HEART 
"My dearest lea, how should she know anything gu
it  *,,
"8he took a walk while we were out to-day, and strayA;' [
into the new road and came upon the chain gang, amoi   .,4$
whom she saw and recognized Ham Gow, notwithstandi'it
his cropped hair and his yellow prison garb. She h    '.'T
known him ever since she first came to Hawkeville, whe <>
she was but ten years old. They were-engaged to each' 
other." ..
"What a complication! Is it not possible she may b.'
mistaken ?"                    "
'Quite possible. So, Cosmo, dear, this is what I want; "
you to do: inspect that chain gang. See if there be any,'.M
convict among them closely resembling Ham    Gow, ana' "
find out all about him-what is his name, and where hi: U.
native place, what is his crime, and how long his term of 
servitude."               '
"I will do so, Isoline, for the interest I feel in the poor 
fellow, as well as for your sake. But I really do not think !'
this felon in the chain gang can be Ham Gow. It is dif'..
ficult to imagine that merry, easy-going vagrant doing; .
anything so serious as to bring him under the ban of the,'
law."
And with this the lieutenant struck a fusee, lighted his'
cigar and walked out into the garden attached to theirl. 
quarters to smoke.                                    -
Isoline was very much fatigued with her day's excur;:,;;
Pion, and soon retired to bed-not, however, before she had 'i
informed Lona Pond, who attended her night toilet, tbt iI,
she had spoken to Lieut. Belle Isle in favor of the conviet ',;
supposed to Ham Gow, and that the lieutenant had prom- ~.
ised promptly to interest himself in the case.         '
With this gleam of hope the poor, faithful betrothed ot' i:
Ham Gow retired to her cot.                           ,
CHAPTER XVII 
."NO. 4444"                  . ', :*,
THE next day was an anxious one for the mistress and :
the maid.                                              ;
,  .
. ..- ..



<pb n="159"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     159
Lieut. Belle Isle was on duty all the forenoon. In'the
afternoon, however, he went out on his errand of mercy.
He was gone two hours, and returned with the result of
his quest. It might be deemed satisfactory according to
the manner in which those most concerned might take it.
Isola ran to meet him, drew him into the parlor, sat
down with him on the sofa, and besought him to tell her
"everything at once l"
"As if I, or any other human being could do that I"
laughed the lieutenant. "But I can tell you in sequence,"
he added.
"First of all, then, was the man in question Ham Gow?"
she eagerly demanded.
"First of all, then, the man in question was not Ham
Gow," laughed Cosmo.
"I thought so. Well?"
'But he was enough like the worthy Ham to have de-
ceived his own mother-if he ever had one "
"Tell me about it."
"If you will permit me! I went out this afternoon on
something of a wild-goose chase to look after a convict of
whose name, nativity, offense and term of servitude I was
totally ignorant, and having no more clue to the fellow
than that of his reported resemblance to the estimable Mr.
Gow, of Demondike. Well, my dear, I went out upon the
road and walked up one side and down the other, scanning
the faces of the convicts as they squatted upon the ground
in their yellow uniforms, with their piles of stone between
their knees and their breaking hammers in their hands,
cracking away at their work. Their ankles were fettered,
my dear, and a chain was passed from one fetter to another
along the whole gang, so that there was no escape for the
workers, even although they were on the highroad, with an
open country immediately around and a mountain wilder-
ness beyond, and they were guarded only by half a dozen
keepers."
Isoline shuddered.
'I walked along the line, up on one side and down the
other-the keepers touching their hats to my uniform-
taking me, perhaps for a special inspector sent by the super-
intendent-until I came abreast of a man whoe presence
made me start."



<pb n="160"/>
Db  .     A, '  RTt'E EABRT              ::' T  '
"The man Lona Pond sawr "
"He must have been. In spite of his difigingd
hair and onvict jacke  he wa mch a counterpair of t
Gow that I was for the~ m ent convinced thatour
tramp was before me." '-. ! .    , 
,"Oh, Coamo r interjerted Ioaine,         '   .i'1
" I wish to speak to thatman,' I said the keeper nar
at hand.       .
a"t hA  right, sir,' he rplied touching his hat.
"Then   went up to te felow, and.-I asuie you, I!I
line, that I spoke  the ma with ase much diffidence as
could have felt in addae 'n .  aeld Marshal His RoYV
wHignes the Duke of atbng hi~maelf."    ..
I can udtndetd thi      You felt a8 ifyou were 
justifiably intruding upon ie poor soul, in his degrad"
tion and misery, or that he might think so, without bei:
able to defend hims~lf.' 
"Something like that. WgI4  I asked him:   "
" What is your name, Imyl                     - ''I
"What i that to you e; growled tuning up t~ :H
a face deformed by rage, out of aikenes to our gay Hai
Gow, and into that of a frownim.ng , . .4
" was startd   tpreently .Mped     myslf and sai' l
'I took you for a man I  C Lnev in the old conW :
-tryj-.-. Gw.     . .' .    .:. ,  .    '      . ,.,s
U"Mr. ---    ' roared the siweCia g ruffian, and .,
brought his hammer down Wit ( ,frce that sent the fheii
ments of stone flying about lile shot, from an exp
.bombsheU                    .'    :      .       .
"'Bedt let the brute-aloae, ir+,, He be one of the wo I
in the wholi Ilot,' aid the keeer tome.           A 
drawn the keper~   a little o  of, ,'
'H"e ih  o. 4444, and albota the    sre. hadisse
in the. colo y, sir. He is safe to go to Port Aihur ^
weeding o    't ol the convicts.            . . 
" Bt aboit his name and hi crime? I inquired.  ,. ;
"To. 44   and a.d Io, stl Tha is al:I    ktnhiiaI
him. If you   .t to find out more, youn  inqir
office of the superipnt lent of convicts, ir.'  ,  .'; S
"I thanked the civil 'keeper and turned my  i
Macquarrie Street, and went to the offce of. t..p]
. ~   ~   ~   ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~ .   , ",.:.:is,},; 2



<pb n="161"/>
'.':',. I, 't^.'.^^'^^^it'N ^ ' f ' , ''^
:~'i * j:'I ',   p*A  bAZM f;
,;ig !i*** 'l>" ;  e ^ ; ,, a  :'S ^ (  '**1...1 .... ,'  i" iFr  i  (  j 
U@; batasfhti y  itri  teajW  irf hS41  i^,z;tit^ ' .
*.k  .^, 1^ ^ ^^ ,              ,
'}X1  ^, j,'s~~~~~~~~fi'i~~~b,:>.~~,.X, ~Fai~ f  iti.
*ytewa4~ .ra 10'Aw^ ' ^^       1'p~t  iE*11* .rI
., aevW~wgW^'aii,*'i,-*ei 'X,  1 *,>* e:i4
>ftmlg  c  iigs 4154*  *,$e4 
Sw*46tne4o  erfl#  it     M*1r   '
,8*  i 1 C  i , 1' i/ i   di?: :, *lt^* * * ,,.':
'.  <..F44;.a&,rifr   a #^  D  r ,  ,    '  j
* ;-*,,' l^ *s;;;;j.~ tiO^S9 t   .4n itwiv f y  :
,'# ret. X Mfn. w;'  * ^ .*-^**i .. **.. 1
;t: 9LS &^i GWi D WWndit*j t:,,gi .te ar  the
*   ai C        . le fe' td  ,R Q%  1**a r6 eB: j , -beZ' . 
*"*^(idSit ,':hs;iFsffMeltee^,tewjfN* ,l^.<^*N' hi2f . 
*^A '.Ipf Afct-''wE 'i'IxW''^^^  i e^^,w" t  'o 
Oi e wizt toi 'heW zoes.$bw t * .r
' ' i;*i'.lt,2s oux, lze*4 $ neti' The eaw
i ;tfh t ncdsg1  ,~l4J   butr~~d~
t*ie 'j l#  ie: ** ,si. "i*aP  sdittt gift, i i  b
t~C~m~ 1W Bol4* Mw he Santad poe wit him
- 0Bft ihib nait  toe o , t iltdt name toi gdH
MiWe ta dsa  Wse^I i fi r  bi't N  .ntdX  bu that ent6
;    .t u ifq iteJ^I BeVIW.^ with a ipH i
ui her& aaAcBtr4'do ou Wsiit tat oofict ,to :e'i t V1
'kitig      j s  ;       ,-i
. d^^t*  'ihiE                  4W ltc^ ;sg.!t ;4,'
i '4sXMa~tt:>~Jla~ ie  ; i sh irgbatei w ,tphe o
rektaea tn' nr ';-' '  ;,'.  ,  *;'  . . '  !.^ i .' ;
* 4 , thaend'"t-  t insiat  ipotimalib'iMi? b*', '*Sfe is
nrot D *, bnr r*ongl^he, m'artrb4'.; He
is  ia , Od  hd d t*oIg4 yt b gw mai3w i .iA t 
Aad theM fteanithe gitr ie Tei(d. tfl^<iHcee as
the leutw* he -vreeived it fromft 'the p.ISi aifU oritiae.
This iomatf oul thouldn have c aiAzil* t  irl, but it
dw  *  '  ,  '  '   '  .  ' 
,;.,   ,  ,  ..1 1 ;  ** ,:  ;.1.  .**  '. *



<pb n="162"/>
*"       '''. 'A'  T'; kWVlREUi nA'WP                     ' 
4'ThQ master may havt apoken th be wrong mni4 nt
ie oebte I2    Mi,^  haid .te i5oilgtble .ieatal, ;.'',: .'
d'ut. my dcr child, he spoke tothe.<nly:oniie itBgai ,
w.o- 'bore a li tcn ess to Hm  0i,' and tlhis ,Hii   rp e:'
alikeness 'o G6w that Mr,, Be1 'Isle himself was, opirised
into a moinentry blief tit he ws Gow; bat this qp ''
.wa~taoo  dissipated by invgtittiot ilito the ~tma's  i
as I have fold you, Do, be" pesiaaed ofi e t trlth, .i4,
so that your mind may Wb, at est" pleaded the, : .   . ;.
'"That is what I wish sea' mpost, dear madam, ti   dieel c .:.
inced of the truth. Is fihere any objf4idontoia t fread'r 
ing'te see aprisoner  '    ...        ..  '.. '
"I--d .ot lknow. But 'b   coirse, tuppe twere     .'::
days when near relatives and ftieads 'of convicte l  be  :
permitted to see them. P' yoiu wifh to Viit tbi doubtfl '
man, Los?"' inquaired Me. .Belle Ile.      ',
"-Oh yes, madam, if ybi4 plasp. t wi h to see aid'speak ',
with him. To see and hbar Wth my own 'eye and earn :';
whether hfe is Ham ,Gow or 'alBd r. 'Oould I do so, dear . 
madam" ' . .                 :  .              .   '
I m thinkin. "I tiin. It if;teribI place for youo go t
the, convicts' barracks-and th.t',man ;is a horrible -rf- '".
* .  'fiti "  ' '         '   :' .',  .,     " . .      i:
tYf he is 8Ha  Gow he, wfld not want to injure met
and if e is'anybody ele I sho.ias snot be afraid& of hian'
:he. c.iuld not hurt me with:. fiea' gnard  around.  f^'f
,ma'am, let me go r' pleaded the iil,' with clased h *.L
.; sI an thinking how it coul bt' ringked with prop
for yo   onr yo,  r you are gong.fo see a stranger, and no
ypor friend, as you suppose him .ibe.       .    .   ':
"Oh, madam, let me go " 'peni'  ed ''Ina.         .
"Since nothig else  ill sati  yon, I sappose yot
be permitte to  do so. Let'm fe iee. The chaplain  i
the prionaes fleuently ;: I will. 'gt Mr. Belle sle to ,
to the abapla',: and ask him to tke yon with him to,
Hice on' Sunday btween    rvicee, when the .onvict
be in their ceUs.' .,ibat, will be the beet vway, I t.%Si
'tOh, thai* y     ni main, thank you," said ti
raising and kissingth hand of her mistress.  '
'"There, child, go and say your prayers and-.i
said Mrs, Belle Isle, kindly.  .     .   ,
"Goodnight, madam."             .   . 
* -, s A, i'4 4
' Iu'w''':1.Wi2)~s4k



<pb n="163"/>
"ood-nighbt, LoaaJ; .   ,  '            :
The next .ay was Saturday. 'M3 rs.      e Isle, with'a
laughing apology for troubling him  o. much with the love
affairs.of her maid, spioke'  o the tiutena~ in regard to the 
projected. visit 'of Lona.to thi prion, anad inired if the
chaplain could be induced to take lr.' ;
Mr. Bell Isle replied that bi.thought 8, ad would ee
to it i t!4 course of the dy.' 
"But it is very strang thatat a't 'en't 'be brought to
listen to reason!, de onud, .sonewhat impatiitly.,:
"Don't be harsh with her,  oamlo. She Twants to, see
for hertelf' Whe  once she ha 'done so sbe .will' be con-
tented," pleaded Isolne.    ,            . 
"I hope so," said Cosno, with a shtg of hi3s Bhobldes.
That afternoon the lieutenant happne   to meet the
chaplain in the purser's store, and, mentioned to him the
wish of Lna Pond.          . 
The reverend gentleman willinglyageed to take the girl
to the cell of Hice. 
"I hope the young woman will find that she has been
mistaken n supposing that this man i> anyone :h.'  ever
'  met before. He is a fearfal ruafia---one who 'ears lnt
. God, neither rtgards man'; one 'whose hand is. against
every man,' thus compelling 'every ran's hand to. bfe.
,  against him,'" concluded the Rev. Mr.- Heron chaplain
.of the convicts' barracks.    ' 
,,. ,. Lona Pond was pleasedwith the news that she was to be
taken by a minister to visit the convict, 
. She attended church on, Sunday forenoon, and after
':  service she walked to the priso, where she was mnet by
,  the chaplain, who conducted her through the gates and
;., past the various guards and sentries into the long, low
(f(. ' building, and to the cell on the ground floor that-wts occu-
-., 'pied by No. 4444. They had approached ihe cell'o softly
t-it the prisoner, seated on the eideof his ao'dw bed be-
hind tie' grated door, did not perceve the ,i"trad~.
L " -fnaPorid gazed upon'him'as he sa   lietly tere, with
.' .his briaway arms folded across his e'amilehest, i  shorb
'..to ip"ed1tead bowed upon it.              '
,[. ,;,fief1"' ieried the chaplain, to call his ttteition.
"[ M' .'.  . iinstantaneous and terrible ehangel
1';> 



<pb n="164"/>
F
(ri .I::"Ii-. .;1. 
" 1
                                     g;:.   .  ;:
i
:
il
                    '..' '                                I
.uimn!
.i
, ,.;;
:r t
*. 1                          1
:!
,,
:I;i

 : i i: il:
I
'' ' ''
It
:";":lb'fi".?#f,?StiP[, 
..
:"; r,*ta''":iF,; i
'r
I' i.  
;LU, :i r
i;' a`ap81i  .
* i.; . .; ...:
rq
, .I
',!,
4i'l  ''
:CP%lu'iiPi ';:%Wr!
&u!
r:l
. ?,TI;?C?t';,D53;r3 9919;.9BFI
': 

`ilr
I
,G,Yra'
:  I :lii
'                                                
uC;",iia6ie* YbiTiiTZdiis"43f6;:rY" r
        Ik  ;  '  '  ''     ''''
''' " :1:I'\
, v r: . i



<pb n="165"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    165
the colonies was the hope of finding him here-a forlorn
hope at the best, my poor girl, as I explained to you; for
even if there were a chance of your meeting him in this
large place and scattered population, he could scarcely per-
mit himself to be recognized, even by you. He is in hiding
somewhere, probably under an assumed name, and he must
remain in hiding until the real murderer of the Earl of
Hawkewood is discovered and himself freed from the charge
of that crime."
"But never to hear from him, madam 1" sighed the girl.
"It is hard! But you must hope. He will probably
write to his friends at Demondike. You can write to them
and inquire for news of him, you know."
"Yes, ma'am, I can do that, but-Old Nan Crook, nor
young Nan, either, ever goes to the post office! My letter
might lie there forever uncalled for!"
"Inclose it in one to the Rev. Dr. Vincent, with a re-
quest that he will have it sent to the Ruined Tower. It
would be sure to reach Old Nan then."
"Yes, madam, and it might put her up to inquiring at
the post office for other letters, and so get any that may
be waiting there for her from Ham Gow! I will write
to-morrow, ma'am, and send my letter by the ship that is
to sail on Wednesday."
"That is right," said the lady, as she arose to prepare
for the afternoon church service.
The next day, Monday, Mr. and Mrs. Belle Isle were
engaged to lunch with the Viscount and Viscountess Seyres.
They went early and found Lord and Lady Seyres alone.
The viscountess had not recovered her spirits. It is prob-
able she never could get over the memory of her error and
the humiliation of its discovery. This was the punishment
that neither the mercy of God nor man would avert while
she lived in this world.
As the four sat together Leut. Belle Isle related, for Lady
Seyres' amusement, the episode of the accidental meeting
between the girl Lona Pond and the convict Jack Hice,
who bore so strong a resemblance to Ham Gow, and gave
a short sketch of the notorious felon's history.
In the midst of his relation, Lady Seyres suddenly
started, and said:



<pb n="166"/>
166          A TORTURED HEART
"This man Rice, who is said to be the very counterpart
of Gow, seems to have been in England at the very time
of the mysterious assassination of the Earl of Hawkewood,
after which you may remember, when Gow was charged
with the crime, and warrants were issued and rewards were
offered for his apprehension, there were three distinct and
equally reliable, though totally irreconcilable accounts of
his whereabouts-one, that he had crossed over to France;
one, that he had sailed from London Docks for Australia;
and one, that he was still lurking in the neighborhood of
Hawkeville."
"Yes, of course we remember that; but what deduction
does your ladyship draw from it?" inquired Mr. Belle Isle,
while Isoline looked deeply interested, and the viscount in-
quisitive-for the latter was not as well posted in the details
of the homicide at Hawke Hall as were the other three
persons present.
"What inference do I draw? Why, this one-that the
man Hice was in the neighborhood of Hawkeville; that he
might have been the assassin of the Earl of Hawkewood,
and that he was mistaken for Gow by one of the persons
who professed to have seen the latter," said Lady Seyres.
Her words produced a profound impression upon all
present.
The discovery of the murderer of the Earl of Hawke-
wood had been the subject of the most anxious solicitude
to all concerned for nearly two years past; for since the
statement of Lady Volante Belle Isle in regard to what
she had witnessed in the bachelors' corridor on the night
of the murder had been made public, few, if anyone, be-
lieved in the guilt of Gow, although the warrant issued
and rewards offered for his apprehension had not been
withdrawn.
Mr. Belle Isle was the first to break the thoughtful
silence that followed Lady Seyres' suggestion.
"This theory had not occurred to me. Your ladyship
has certainly found a clue to the mystery of that murder.
I shall lose no time in writing to Scotland Yard to have
this clue followed up. If we can bring the crime home
to this man Hice he will be sent back to England for
trial, we shall get rid of an 'ugly customer,' and an inno-
cent man will be freed from the suspicion of guilt."



<pb n="167"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    167
"Oh, Heaven grant that we could discover the real crim-
inal, that the guiltless might cease to suffer!" murmured
Isoline, clasping her hands in the earnestness of her feel-
ings.
The conversation changed.
"Cosmo," said the viscountess, "now that you have come
into so large a fortune, I wonder you do not resign from
the army."
"No, dear ma'am, I cannot resign now. I have but re-
cently received my commission, and my regiment is quar-
tered here, at, perhaps, the most undesirable military sta-
tion in the world; but, upon this very account, it is a point
of honor for me not to resign. What do you think, sir?"
inquired the young lieutenant, turning to the viscount.
"I think you are perfectly right, Belle Isle. And let
me add, that I am very glad that your sense of honor,
which detains you at your post of duty, also keeps you
near us, so that we enjoy your society," replied the viscount,
vith a genial smile, as he turned and bowed to Isoline, as
if to include her in his compliment.
"You are very kind to say so," answered the lieutenant,
warmly.
"And, besides, mamma, you know that Cosmo and my-
self are too happy to be near you and papa," added Isoline,
with a fond glance toward Lord Seyres, whom she had
learned to love and honor above all mankind, except her
own husband.
"I thank you, my dear child. Believe me that we also
hold
'Your blooming life
A part of our life's joy,'"
said the viscount, quoting the lines as he laid his hand
caressingly on the head of his stepdaughter.
Luncheon was then announced.
Lady Seyres arose and took the arm of Lieut. Belle Isle,
and led the way to the dining room.
Lord Seyres offered his to Mrs. Belle Isle, and followed.
The four sat down to a round table adorned with an
elegant service of Bohemian porcelain, and supplied with
a dainty repast.
The luncheon was an enjoyable affair, and the party



<pb n="168"/>
168          A TORTURED HEART
lingered rather long at the table toying with the delicious
tropical fruits that formed its last course, and talking on
the same topics that had engaged their attention in the
drawing room.
Soon after leaving the table, however, Mr. and Mrs. Belle
Isle made their adieux and departed.
As they drove through Macquarrie Street a general com-
motion attracted their attention.
"What is up?" inquired Mr. Belle Isle of his coachman,
when he had pulled the checkstring and stopped the car-
riage.
"They are saying that a prisoner has escaped, sir," re-
turned the man.
"Ohl Go on," ordered his master. The escape of a
prisoner more or less was not a matter of such moment
as to interest Cosmo Belle Isle.
As soon as they reached their quarters in the barracks
the lieutenant shut himself up in the little room where he
kept his books and stationery, to write a letter to the chief
of police at Scotland Yard, requesting him to follow up
the clue suggested by Lady Seyres.
When he had finished his task he came out to post his
letter, and was met by a startling piece of news.
It was no ordinary malefactor who had broken his chains,
but ihe ferocious man-demon, Hice, whose name was a ter-
ror to all who had ever heard of him.
This escape actually spread a panic over the female por-
tion of the community, as if a great Numidian lion, in a
state of hydrophobia, had broken loose and was roaming
at large through their neighborhood.
Not a woman would venture out to walk, ride, or drive
beyond the city's limits until the fugitive monster should
be recaptured.
CHAPTER XVIII
THE FUGITIVE
WE have left the Countess of Hawkewood only half rec-
onciled to her husband, awaiting the advent of her heir at
Hawke Hall, in Cornwall; and we have left Old Nan Crook



<pb n="169"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   169
hoarding her ill-gotten money and quarreling with her
daughter at the Ruined Tower of Demondike; and now
we must leave the Viscountess Seyres mentally and spirit-
ually expiating her offenses in the presence of the pure-
hearted and noble-minded man who had loved and trusted
her sufficiently to make her his wife, and whose very for-
bearance to reproach her she felt as her deepest reproach;
and Mr. and Mrs. Belle Isle enjoying their protracted honey-
moon at his post of duty, and poor Lrna Pond bewailing
her lost lover-all these last-mentioned people being at the
antipodes; and we must go after one of the lost men of our
story, Ham Gow, the ubiquitous, who was seen and sworn
to, at three several places, when, according to the laws of
nature, he could only have been at one.
We, however, already know that when the honest fisher-
men swore to have started with him for the coast of France
on the very morning of the murder, and the equally honest
clergyman testified to having ridden with him to London
that same morning, and seen him off to Australia that same
day-Ham   Gow, the real, original article, could neither
have been leaving the country by the channel nor by the
ocean, since only a few hours later he appeared at the
Ruined Tower by Demondike, with a broken head 1
We have seen how safely he was hidden in the smug-
glers' secret cave, and how skillfully he was nursed by Old
Nan Crook, until the false clues, supposed to have been
true ones, given by the fishermen and the clergyman, drew
the attention of the police from the Ruined Tower and gave
him time and opportunity to escape.
Then Old Nan Crook had favored his flight by La Belle
Femme--"The Pretty Woman"-a smuggling craft com-
manded by Capt. Pierre Moreau, trading-free trading-
between the coasts of France and England and the West
Indies.
La Belle Femme was at that time lying off Demondike,
waiting to land a cargo of St. Croix rum, and Havana cigars,
and to take off a cargo of Paisley shawls and Sheffield
cutlery, which lay hidden in the smugglers' cave, ready for
export.
La Belle Femme was going to the West Indies, and Old
Nan Crook strongly counseled Ham to go along with the
skipper.



<pb n="170"/>
170          A TORTURED HEART
But there was something in the poor tramp's nature-
perhaps some inherited sense of honor-that had always
prevented him, on the one hand, from connecting himself
in any way with the smugglers, and, on the other, from
betraying them to the authorities.
Ham Gow, the constitutional tramp, who could never
rest long in any one place, and never be happy unless he
was, as he expressed it, "on the go," was heartily tired of
his seclusion in the smugglers' cave.
He longed for liberty, and now that the opportunity had
come, he was resolved to escape-not by the smugglers'
craft, however. He would derive no benefit of any sort
from the smugglers.
He was determined to trust to his own wit and his own
limbs to make good his exit from England.
He did not mean to confide his plans to either of the
Nans. He knew that to do so would provoke a storm of
opposition and of argument, and Ham never could bear
to argue with the two Nans, or with any other women,
for that matter; so he made up his mind to avoid all fuss
by stealing off quietly from the cave and from the Ruined
Tower.
It must be recalled to memory that on the first hight
after the withdrawal of the police from the tower, Young
Nan had come down from the strong room through the
secret passage to the smugglers' cave, where Ham was
still sequestered, and guarded by Old Nan, and had offered
to relieve the crone of her watch and remain with the hidden
man during the night, and that her offer had been eagerly
accepted.
Old Nan had gone up to the comparative comforts and
luxuries of the strong room in the Ruined Tower, and
Young Nan had remained with the prisoner in the smug-
glers' cave.
The two had talked over the incidents of the "tragedy"
at Hawke Hall, and Ham had displayed a levity of feeling
over the homicide that had surprised and displeased Young
Nan.
But his subsequent declaration-that he could not regard
the affair seriously because he did not believe that the earl
had ever been well murderd at all, but that he had only been
half killed, and had come to himself on the cooling board,



<pb n="171"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    171
as some supposed corpses had been known to do, and not
liking the position, had walked off on his own legs-stolen
his own body, in point of fact-had so stunned Young Nan
that she had no power left in her for any other emotion
but amazement.
Not that she believed the tramp's theory 1 If she could
have believed it, she must have died of the shock. The
mere idea presented to her mind was enough to overwhelm
her.
She never made one word of comment, but just sat staring
at him with open eyes and mouth until he brought his
theory to a climax by saying:
"For if the earl didn't come to life and walk off with
his own body, where is it?"
Then Nan spoke:
"Ham, you are such a fool that I don't think as I can
trust you to leave the country without me. You'll be get-
ting into some other scrape and come to some bad end, be-
cause you are such a fool !"
Cow laughed good-humoredly, and said it was bed-time,
and that, as he could no longer call himself an invalid, he
would leave the mattress and pillows to Nan, and take a
blanket, and roll himself up at the other end of the cavern.
"Kiss me good-night, Nan," he said, as he was turning
to walk away.
"Good-night, lad! God forgive us our many sins, and
God save you, lad!" said Nan, with unusual tears in her
eyes.
"You, too, Nan, and amen," said the tramp, as he turned
away.
And five minutes later Ham Gow was fast asleep, and
his snores could be heard all over the cavern.
Ham slept soundly until about three o'clock in the morn-
ing, when he awoke with a start.
"Blest if I hadn't nearly overslept myself," he said to
himself, with a deep yawn. "And if Nan had woke up
before me I should never have got off without a row," he
added, as he arose and stretched himself.
As he had lain down in his clothes at night he did not
need to dress himself in the morning; but he went to the
subterranean stream at the end of the cavern and washed
his face and head, dried thwm  a cone of the coarse crash



<pb n="172"/>
172          A TORTURED HEART
towels that had been brought from the tower, and, lastly,
crept up to the mattress and looked over the sleeping wom-
an. And very heavy sleepers were both the Nans, Young
Nan being the heaviest of the two.
"Heaven save her! she is the best of the whole lot, after
all. I am glad she blessed me before she slept last night;
for when she wakes I shall be beyond her blessing or her
banning," murmured the tramp, under his breath.
"I wonder if I dare kiss her good-by again ?" he breathed,
looking regretfully on the sleeping face. "Most likely I
shall never see her again. I'll risk it," he decided, as he
cautiously knelt down beside the mattress, stooped over
Nan's face, and softly touched her forehead with his lips.
Nan slightly stirred, and murmured in her dreams:
"Poor, dear Ham l" and relapsed into profound slumber
again.
Gow sighed deeply as he arose from his knees.
"It's no choice of mine, going this time, or this way.
I am obliged to go," he muttered, as he made his way to
the mouth of the secret passage leading from the cave to the
crypt below the Ruined Tower.
He ascended to the cellar, crossed it, and rolled the
stone away that concealed the entrance of the secret stair-
case, and went up that to the iron door that formed the
back of the huge Dutch oven in the solid masonry of the
chimney.
At length he emerged into the strong room, having
closed the iron door behind him.
The early dawn was breaking in through the uncurtained
window, and by its dim light he saw that Old Nan was
sleeping soundly on her bed.
He went np and looked at her, murmuring:
"I owe you my life, old woman. Take my thanks, and
my assurance that I will repay you, if we live to meet
again."
He stooped and kissed Old Nan without in the least dis-
turbing her repose.
Then he went about the room, gathering up certain of
his own few personal effects, which he made into a bundle,
together with a supply of bread, cheese, and cold beef, which
he wrapped in paper before putting it among his clothes.
Next, he helped himself to a flask of brandy from Old



<pb n="173"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    173
Nan's bottle, knowing full well that he would be welcome
to the same, and put it into his coat pocket.
Finally, he took a few silver coins that he had hidden
away in a crevice of the old wall, and with these in his
vest pocket he lifted his bundle, put it on a stick, threw it
over his shoulders, caught up a good soft felt hat-the
property of Dennis Prout-from its hook, and put it on
his head, sallied forth to make his escape, and to seek his
fortune.
The vivid redness of the eastern horizon showed that the
sun was near its rising.
But Ham Gow turned his steps westward toward Stony
Fells, not taking the beaten track, but cutting across fields,
dodging down lanes, breaking through thickets, and always
keeping himself out of sight of early passengers.
He reached the barren promontory misnamed Stony
Fells, and he prowled along under its gray garden walls.
waiting to get a sight of his sweetheart-for Old Nan and
Young Nan were both right in saying that Ham Gow would
have risked his neck sooner than have left the country with-
out having said farewell to Lona Pond.
He had not waited long before he saw her come out of
the kitchen door, into the back yard to draw water from
the well.
He looked cautiously around, and seeing no one else near,
called her name softly:
"Lona, love."
She heard, started, dropped her bucket, and looked
around.
"Here I am."
She saw him then and stared in terror.
"It is I!  Your Ham! Don't you know me?      Why,
Lona !"
She ran toward him then, eagerly speaking under her
breath.
"Oh, Ham, is it you? Is it indeed you? No! I didn't
know you, at first! What have you been doing to yourself,
Ham? You look so thin and white, and you have lost your
long black hair and beard! Where have you been, Ham,
dear? Some said you had gone to France, and some said
you had sailed for Australia!"



<pb n="174"/>
174          A TORTURED HEART
"As if I would have gone anywhere, without first bidding
you good-by, Lona !" he answered.
He had been speaking to her with his head just above
the garden wall. Now he dropped down from his posi-
tion, calling:
"Come out to me, love, since I cannot come in to you."
Lona passed swiftly through the back garden gate, clos-
ing it after her, and joined her lover on the outside.
They sat down on the pile of stone upon which Ham
had been standing to look over the wall.
"Oh, Ham, Ham, it is dangerous for you to be here!
Don't you know that there are warrants out and rewards
offered for your arrest?" said the pale and trembling girl.
"Yes, my pond lily, I know all about it; but I do not
think anybody will execute that warrant, or earn that re-
ward, while I am sitting here, saying good-by to you! You
never believed me capable of committing the crime I am ac-
cused of, Lona, did you ?" gravely inquired the tramp.
"Who, I?" exclaimed the girl, in a tone of astonishment
that set all his fears at once to rest.
"No, of course, I know you didn't! But, Lona, love,
although I never did that murder and never could have
done it, yet I am flying from justice as if I were a guilty
man!" said Ham Gow, bitterly.
"I am thinking you are flying from injustice, rather,"
replied Lona Pond.
"You are right! So I am I I am flying from injustice.
I should not get justice if I stayed here, nor should I fear
it if I could get it! They say that in the eye of the law
flight is a confession of guilt! But here I am, an innocent
man, flying because I cannot prove my innocence, and be-
cause circumstantial evidence would be sure to prove me
guilty in the face of truth! So I must ignominiously ab-
scond, to save myself, or remain here to be innocently
hanged ! A fine alternative for an honest man!" laughed
the tramp.
"Oh, Ham, dear, go, go! Much as I love to have you
here, I feel what the risk is to you! Oh, go, Ham, go;"
pleaded the terrified Lona.
"My girl, tell me the truth! Am I not greatly changed
from what I was? Would any chance passenger be likely to
recognize me at a glance? Tell me truly! I have not



<pb n="175"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    175
risked such a contingency yet  But I may have to do so
before I reach London."
Lona looked at him steadily for a few moments, and
then said:
"No, Ham, I don't think anyone would. You are so
changed, 1 did not know you at first myself. Your hair is
cut close, your great black beard is shaven off, your shaggy
eyebrows are clipped, your dark, sunburned complexion is
bleached. To tell you the truth, Ham Gow, you look a deal
more like the late young Earl of Hawkewood than you do
like yourself!"
The tramp threw back his head and laughed long and
merrily.
"There! that sounds like yourself! Your laugh and your
voice and your eyes are like yourself, but nothing else! No
one would know you from the printed description."
"The printed description !" echoed the tramp.
"Oh, yes, Ham, the printed description that shows you
as you used to be, but is so unlike you as you are, that it is
equal to a free pass out of the country !" exclaimed Lona
Pond, laughing herself now at the idea.
"But-have you seen these printed descriptions?" in-
quired Gow, still in suspense.
"Oh, yes, indeed. They are up all over the country.
The billstickers put up one right here on our garden wall.
It was a damp day when they did it, and just as soon as
their backs were turned I went and peeled it off the wall
again before it was dry! I saved it. I can show it to you
if you would like to look at it," said Lona, eagerly.
"Yes, I should," replied Gow.
Lona jumped up, sped through the garden gate, across
the garden and into the house. She came running back
with the paper in her hand.
"Say," said Ham Gow, "is there no one stirring in the
house ?"
"No, nor will not be for an hour yet! I have the brunt
of the morning work."
"It is a shame you should have it !"
"Oh, no, it isn't! There's only me and my stepmother.
I am young and she is old. It is right I should take the
morning's work," said Lona Pond, cheerfully.
"Never mind, my dear! If I have not gone to Australia,



<pb n="176"/>
176          A TORTURED HEART
I am going there, and I mean to make my fortune by hook
or by crook, so as to send for you and marry you and make
a lady of you, as many a poor man has done by his sweet-
heart before me," said the tramp.
"Lord grant it, Ham, dear! But now listen while I read
you this description, which was like enough to you a month
ago, but see how it fits you now," said the girl. And sitting
down on the pile of stones, with her back to the fence, she
held out the broad poster between her two hands, and read
as follows:
" 'TWO HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD.
"'By order of the Lord Lieutenant of the county the
above reward is hereby offered and will be given for the
apprehension of Henri Delaplaine and Ham Gow, charged
with the murder of the late Earl of Hawkewood. Said
Henri Delaplaine-'
"But I'll skip all that and come to you," said Lona
Pond, interrupting herself, as she passed the poster down
through her hands and read on-with running comments:
" 'The same Ham Gow is of medium height and size'-
You have fallen away so that you look rather tall and
slim-'with a large head covered with a shock of long,
black, coarsely curling hair.'-Your hair is cut so close that
your head looks rather small than otherwise.-'He has a
dark, ruddy, sunburned complexion, black, shaggy eye-
brows, large, vigorous black eyes, and a very full and
long black beard.'-You are as pale as a ghost, with lantern
jaws, languid eyes, not much eyebrows to speak of, and
no beard at all, only a pitiful, genteel little mustache on
your upper lip.-'He wore, when last seen, an old wide-
awake, brown felt hat, much battered, a coarse, gray blouse,
travel-stained and torn, a pair of brown duck trousers, and
leather-top boots, much broken.'
"Now, let us see! You have a natty little soft hat, a
jacket and trousers of new navy-blue cloth, and a pair of
neat shoes. I don't see the least resemblance between you
and your printed description, Ham," said the girl, as she
rolled up the poster.



<pb n="177"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   177
"Neither do I " exclaimed the tramp. "I think I shall
be quite safe on the road, once I am out of this neighbor-
hood."
"But where did you get that neat suit of clothes, Ham?"
Loaned me by Prout, the coast guardsman, though you
needn't mention it, as it might injure the man if it were
known that he befriended me."
"Of course it might."
"You see, this is a coast guardsman's dress, without the&
badges."
"Yes, I thought it wasl Hushl Some one is calling!"
Some one was calling; It was Mrs. Pond, whose voice
now rose to a shriek, screaming:
"Lona   Lona! Lona! Where are you, me gel ?"
"Oh, I must go, or she will be out here after me and
she will find you! And that would be ruin! Good-by!
Good-by, dear Ham ! I will think of you and love you al-
ways and pray for you every night and morning!"
"Good-by, love! Lona  Good-by! Good-by! I seem to
leave my life in leaving you ! But I will win a fortune for
you and bring you out and marry you and make a lady of
you, as I promise and vow 1 Good-by I Good-by 1"
CHAPTER XIX
THE LOVERS' PARTING
THE lovers were locked for a moment in each other's
arms and then broke suddenly asunder, as the girl turned
and ran in to the gate to meet and stop her rushing step-
mother, and the man donned his hat, shouldered his stick
with the bundle at the end of it, and walked slowly off in
the direction of the road, meaning to commence at once his
tramp to London.
But before he reached the road, in crossing the field by
a narrow private path, he came full tilt upon a horseman,
whom he immediately recognized as Ellis, the village doctor.
Now, if there was one man in the whole community who
would have recognized Ham Gow, under his present meta-
morphosis, that man was Dr. Ellis, who had tended the



<pb n="178"/>
178          A TORTURED HEART
tramp when he was a child and when he was a beardless
youth through more than one spell of illness; so this pale,
thin, languid-eyed, smooth-chinned aspect of the once stout,
sunburned, black-bearded tramp was no unfamiliar one to
Dr. Ellis.
He recognized Ham Gow at once, and the vagrant saw
that he did.
"Gowl You are wanted! I command you, in the name
of the queen, to give yourself up, here, now, to me!" ex-
claimed the doctor, pulling up his horse to a full stop.
The tramp regarded the doctor for a moment with an
expression of quizzical mirth, and then he burst into a
loud laugh, and demanded, derisively:
"How long have you been a bumbailie, doctor, and where
is your warrant?"
The doctor jumped off his horse and made a rush to collar
the tramp; but Gow, with a loud laugh, sprang aside and
dashed into the thicket on his left, and, winding in and out
through the trees, soon lost himself in its wilderness.
He heard the footsteps of the doctor breaking the brush-
wood in his unavailing search, which had at last to be given
over.
The doctor found his way out, remounted his horse and
rode on to Hawkeville police headquarters, and thence to
Hawkewood Hall, to report the encounter.
Meanwhile Ham Gow, leaving the woods by an opposite
exit, and taking lanes and bypaths, went on his weary way
toward London.
No one molested him, no one suspected him. All who
were after the reward were looking out for a robust, sun-
burned, black-bearded ruffian in tattered clothes, battered
hat, and broken shoes, and they never could have identified,
from such a description, the pale, thin, smooth-chinned,
neatly dressed, languid young man who passed slowly along
the highway, with his small bundle hanging on the stick
thrown over his shoulder, and looking more like a poor gen-
tleman student or a pedestrian artist than the "notorious
murderer," Ham Gow.
So the "tramp" tramped on toward London in peace and
safety; and the further he got from Hawkeville the more
secure he felt.
Everywhere along his road he saw the posters pasted up
t



<pb n="179"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    179
offering a reward for his arrest; but as the wanted man
was so very unlike himself, he only laughed at them, re-
peating Lona Pond's words:
"They are 'as good as a free pass' for me."
He made thirty miles the first day, and slept under the
weather side of a haystack at night. The second day he
also made thirty, for he had been accustomed to long walks,
and even at this time, when he was pale and thin from loss
of flesh and blood, he was really very much stronger than he
looked.
On his second night he slept under the sheltered side of
a barn.
On the third day he made but twenty-five miles, and
then, about dusk, finding himself near a lonely roadside inn
of the humbler class, and feeling in need of something more
supporting than stale bread and meat and cold water, which
had been his traveling rations, and something more restful
than the hard ground under the sheltered side of a hay-
stack of barn wall, which for the last two nights had been
his style of dormitory, and thinking that it might be per-
fectly safe to trust himself under the roof of a public
house, he marched boldly on toward the inn.
It was a small, substantial house, irregularly built of
stone and wood, with stable yard on one side and vegetable
garden on the other, and with a swinging board in front
bearing the sign of "The Dun Cow."
The tramp went straight into the taproom, where about
half a dozen farm laborers were gathered, drinking beer,
smoking, and discussing-what do you think?-the tramp
laughed aloud as he heard them: the reward offered for the
arrest of the fugitive murderer, the notorious Ham Gow I
"Eh, sonnies," grunted a gray old man in a whitey-brown
smock frock, "ef a body could lay hold on the wagabone,
as it might be now, he need never strike another strole wi'
pick or shovel  His everlastin' fortin' would be made, lads I
Think on't !"
And the sage, with his hard forefinger, stirred up and
poked down the tobacco in his pipe, replaced it between
his lips and smoked vigorously.
"To hunner pund sterling ain't to be picked up every
day by the like of us, Daddy Dodge," said a young fellow



<pb n="180"/>
180         A TORTURED HEART
in a shooting jacket, an under gamekeeper on a neighboring
estate.
"Ef un 'ould walk in right here an' gi' 'imself up like a
man, we could take him straight to the squoire and dewoide
the two hunner pund among us! Two hunner pund among
foive on us! How much 'ould that be, Daddy Dodge, for
each un us ?" inquired a young workman, in a blue blouse.
"A matter o' forty pund each," answered the gray old
man, after scratching his head and reflecting for a moment.
"But dunnot trouble your minds, sonnies, nor count your
chickens before they are hatched. Thet wilyun will no be
coming in here to gi' himself up. Tek my wurrud for 't,"
he added.
"Who are you talking of?" inquired the subject of these
remarks, walking into their midst.
The five men immediately arose to their feet, touched
their foreheads to the newcomer, whom they took at a glance
to be a gentleman on a pedestrian tour, and looked toward
old Dodge as their spokesman.
"Saving your presence, master, we was talking of that
grand rep'obate, Ham Go, wot killed and murdered the
young Arl of Harkaway down in Corn'all, and a-wishing we
had him here at our marcy," explained the old man.
Ham Gow threw himself down on one of the benches,
called for a pint of "arf an' arf," and leisurely supped it
before he spoke again.
"What about it?" he then inquired.
"Wot 'bout wot, master?" asked the old man.
"This murder 1 You know I am a stranger in England
now, having been absent some years, and only very recently
returned."
This was true, insomuch as Gow had returned to his
native land only two days before the homicide at Hawke
Hall.
"Oh, thin yer dunnot know about the grand reward which
have been offered as any poor man wot had the luck might
pick up any day!" said Daddy Dodge, to whom the "two
hunner pund" seemed of far more importance than any
other circumstance attending the homicide at Hawke Hall.
"Grand reward-to be picked up by any man? No, I
don't know anything about it. What is it for? The biggest



<pb n="181"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    181
potato, the fattest sheep, the best-looking baby, or what?"
demanded the tramp.
"Oh, g'long wid yer, master! 'Tis for the comprehension
of that grand vilyun, Ham Go!"
"Ham Go? Who's he?"
"Yer don't know nothing, master! He's the man wot
asseverated the arl at midnight in his four-post bed, all
curtained with cloth of gold, which is the way of the royal
nobility, and cut his head off and 'wided him into four quar-
ters, and arterward stole his body to sell to the doctors right
underneaf of the right honorable crowner hisself !" said the
old man, knocking the ashes out of his pipe and beginning
to refill it with tobacco.
"What an atrocious villain !" exclaimed Gow, sipping
his "arf an' arf."
"Ay, he was. And there he is up there I"
"Where?" demanded the tramp, affecting to start.
"There!" said the old man, waving his pipe in the
direction of a poster that was set up against the wall in
a conspicuous part of the taproom. "There he be picked
out in black and white, and a precious ruffin, too, with his
bushy, black beard, and long, black hair, and dark com-
plexion, like a wild Indian, and two hunner pund offered
for his reprehension! Ah, the man as nabs him 'ill come
in for a fortin !"
"Ahl" said the tramp, smacking his lips, and looking
as if he wished it were himself would fall upon such a piece
of good luck.
But the poor fellow was tired, footsore, hungry, and
sleepy, and so he hailed the passing landlord, and said he
would have supper and a bed, adding that he would take
supper there-where he sat.
He was soon served with cold beef, bacon, bread, and
cheese, and a tankard of ale, arranged upon a little wooden
table drawn up before his bench.
After having regaled himself with these viands, he fol-
lowed the chambermaid to a small, clean bedroom in one
of the gables of the house, in which, when he was left alone,
he sat down and had a good laugh all to himself.
"I wonder what those donkeys would have done if they
had known the veritable man with the price on his head-
the atrocious villain, Gow-was among them? Taken to



<pb n="182"/>
182          A TORTURED HEART
their heels at once and give me a wide berth, I do suppose.
Courage, Ham I You will never be arrested as Gow 1 Ha!
ha! ha! You languid swell, you are a deal more likely to
be taken for the stolen body of the late earl l"
With these words he undressed and washed and went to
bed between fresh white sheets that smelt of dried lavender.
He had no sooner laid his head upon the pillow than he
fell into the sweet, deep sleep of a quiet mind in a tired
body-a sleep that was unbroken for ten hours.
When he awoke the sun was shining through the quaint
little window in the roof.
He sprang up, gave himself another refreshing wash,
dressed, and went down and ordered his breakfast-coffee,
brown bread, ham, and eggs-for once. Not another such
a breakfast could the tramp afford to order on his journey.
"They hev got that grand rascal, sir," said the landlord,
who waited on him at table.
"Whom do you mean? The murderer of the earl?" in-
quired the tramp.
"Yes, sir; him!"
"Ah ! indeed; have they really got him, at last?"
"Yes, sir; for a fact they have. A passel of youngsters
out on a lark found him in a gypsy encampment. Gypsies
resisted, but a posset-come-and-take-him was summoned,
and the vilyun was took-a horrid-lookin' ruffian as ever
you set eyes on, sir. They brought him here while they
baited their horses, for they had him bound in a break as
they had borrowed, and was taking him off to police head-
quarters; and that's the way I came to see him."
"Are they sure they have got the right man?" inquired
Gow, as he put half an egg into his mouth.
"Oh! ay, sir. His looks tallies exactly with that there
inscription of him. No mistake about him."
"Glad to hear it," said Gow, as he drained his coffee cup
at a draught, and rose from the table.
"They surprised him at the gypsy camp late last night,
sir, about five miles from here, up in Squire Morley's big
woods; but what with the squire being away at Wasser-
Wasser-no-to Badinn-Badinn, and no other 'sponsible
party at hand, and one delay and another, it were about
sun up before they got him here on his way to headquarters.
You might have heard them when they came ?"



<pb n="183"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    183
"No, I did not. I was tired, and I slept very soundly."
"I'd liked you to seen that ruffi'n, sir."
"And I should like to have seen him."
"He was little better looking than a wild, savage bar-
barian, sir."
"Shouldn't wonder. Will you let me have my bill ?"
"Certainly, sir."
The tramp-nay, the pedestrian, we will call him, since
he looks to be respectable, and is addressed as "sir"-the
pedestrian then settled his account, shouldered his staff with
the bundle attached to it, and went on his way.
From this time Mr. Gow walked with greater freedom
on the highways, and slept in peace at the quaint little
wayside inns that sparsely flanked the country roads and
lanes.
At every inn the topic of conversation among the farm
laborers and artisans that flocked thither to spend thcir
evenings and their hard-earned money was the arrest of
the notorious murderer.
Sometimes listening to the discussion in silence, and
sometimes joining in it, Mr. Gow sat ruminating.
"I wonder if there is likeness enough, and circumstantial
evidence enough, to hang that poor devil, in the absence of
his power to prove an alibi, and a-a-what in the deuce is
the Latin for somebody else? And I wonder if I oughtn't to
go forward and give myself up to save a man who is as
guiltless of that crime as-as I am myself-from being le-
gally murdered ? I-I think I ought to take this risk !"
This thought troubled the-pedestrian, not only while
"he took his ease in his inn," but when he was on the road,
and it continued to trouble him, until one lucky hour when,
in setting forth for his day's journey, he passed through the
main street of the village where he had spent the night, and,
meeting a little newsboy, invested a penny in a cheap morn-
ing paper.
As he had entered into this mercantile transaction rather
out of kindness to the barefooted little vender of papers
than from any interest he took in politics, markets or gos-
sip of the day, he folded the journal and put it in his pocket
until his noontide rest should give him leisure to look
over it.
He was now drawing near London, and, in fact, within



<pb n="184"/>
/
184          A TORTURED HEART
twelve hours' walk of the great metropolis, which he hoped
to reach quite easily in the evening of that day.
When by the position of the sun and the admonition of
his appetite he was warned that his dinner time had arrived,
he stopped short in the green lane where he found him-
self, and, sitting down on a convenient stone, he took out
his pint bottle of beer and the paper parcel containing his
bread and bacon, and began to make a meal, ruminating in
the meantime somewhat after this fashion:
"They will be sure to hang that man if I don't go for-
ward. They say he can't prove an alibi, which is the Latin
for somewhere else, and he can't prove a-what in Sancho
is the Latin for somebody else? Everybody swears he is
Ham Gow, and was at Hawke Hall on the night of the mur-
der-and as Ham Gow he will certainly be hanged for the
murder of the earl, unless I go forward and give myself
up to save him! Now the question is, ought I to let a
man be hanged for me even if I am as innocent as he? No,
I ought not. I cannot and will not! As soon as I reach
London I will go and report to the police! So that my
fetch can go free! Ah, well! I wouldn't mind the hanging
so much, that's soon over, and a guiltless man needn't fear
death in any form or shape-but the imprisonment that
precedes it is a horrid nuisance! But honor is honor, and
I must not let another man swing for Ham Gow, guilty or
innocent."
He scattered the crumbs left of his meal for the birds
to eat, threw his waste paper and empty bottle over the
hedge, and then drew from his pocket the journal he had
bought from the newsboy, and began to look over it.
"Hello !" he exclaimed, as he turned a page. "What is
this ?"
He looked at the heading that had caught his sight with
more attention, and then burst into a peal of laughter.
The paragraph was:
"NOT HAM GOW.
"The ruffian who was arrested a few days ago, for the
notorious Gow, turns out to be another man, one Jack Hice,
a convict recently returned from Tasmania, where he has
been serving out his term of seven years' penal servitude
for burglary, and who, since his arrival here, has been at



<pb n="185"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    185
his old tricks, and is now wanted by the police on another
account. And, therefore, though Mr. Hice is freed from
the charge of murder in Cornwall, he is held for highway
robbery in Kent. The criminal, Ham Gow, is still sup-
posed to be at large."
Mr. Gow read this paragraph very carefully from begin-
ning to end, and then threw back his head and laughed
long and loudly.
When his peal of mirthful laughter was over, he thrust
the paper in his pocket and arose to resume his journey,
muttering to himself as he walked down the lane:
"Now, then, Ham, instead of going to a police court and
giving ourselves up to go to prison and be hanged, we will
betake ourselves to the East India Docks and look out for
a ship bound for Australia."
He went on with a lighter step, for a great burden was
lifted from his mind.
Late in the evening he came into London and found his
way to an obscure inn, down one of the bystreets of Pad-
dington, and there he took supper, and, being very much fa-
tigued, immediately retired to bed.
The next morning he arose early, ate a hearty breakfast,
and set out to walk to the East India Docks, some miles
off; for Ham's funds were by this time too low to afford
him the luxury of an omnibus ride.
It was late in the forenoon when he reached the thronged,
laboring, and distracting docks, where the river was crowded
with shipping and the shore with men, women, boys, boxes,
barrels, and all the surging chaos that attends the landing
or the clearing of great merchant and emigrant ships.
He made his way through these moving people, trucks,
horses, bales, and evervthing, and inquired of the first rush-
ing man whom he could bring to a standstill:
"Can you tell me if there is a ship to sail for Australia
soon ?"
"Where did you drop from, mate, to ask such a question
as that? Ain't there the Tasman, to sail with the tide this
arternoon? There! Don't stop me!"
And away went the speaker, with a bale of goods on his
shoulders.
"Do you know whether the Tasman has her full comple-



<pb n="186"/>
186          A TORTURED HEART
ment of seamen?" inquired Gow, laying hold of another fly,
ing stevedore.
"No, she's short-handed, aw b'lieve. Don't bother !"
And away went the second man, with a cask on his back.
Ham Gow slid himself into a boat that was just about
to pull off for the Tasman, laden with casks, took up an oar
and, unchallenged, worked his passage to the ship that was
lying at anchor a few yards from the shore.
He climbed up the side of the Tasman and stood upon
the crowded and busy deck.
"Could I speak with one of the officers?" he inquired of
a deck hand.
"All too busy, I'm thinking," returned the latter, moving
off.
"What is it, my man?" inquired the third mate, who had
overheard the words.
"Wish to ship as a seaman for the passage out, sir,"
replied the tramp, touching his hat.
The officer eyed the applicant from head to foot, and
"gauged" him-a stalwart, wholesome, able-bodied young
man-for Gow had recovered from his languor and his
pallor, during his seven days' saunter through the fresh
air of the fine autumn weather.
"What is your name, my man ?" demanded the officer.
Ham hesitated for a moment. The question took him
by surprise. Then he answered, with a twinkle of his black
eyes:
"Duplicate Hawke, sir."
"Dupe-what?" exclaimed the mate, bending his brows.
"-Licate Hawke, sir," solemnly replied Gow. "I was a
twin, sir; first brother was called by a Christian name, Val-
entine, because he was born on St. Valentine's day, and I
was called Duplicate because I was nothing but a duplicate,
and they dubbed me Dupe for short. Hope my name will
not be an objection?"
"N-n-o," replied the officer, with a smile. "Are you
ready ?"
"Quite, sir," replied the tramp, glancing over his shoul-
der at the bundle on the end of his stick, to intimate that
it contained all his worldly goods.
"Then pass forward there, and lend a hand. You can
sign your articles later."



<pb n="187"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     187
"Ay, ay, sir!" promptly responded the new seaman,
touching his hat.
And so Ham Gow sailed for Australia.
CHAPTER XX
GOLD
THE passage of many months in a single human life
without the occurrence of any special event deemed worthy
of record is a perpetual though not a very general experi-
ence.
Duplicate Hawke made the voyage from England to Aus-
tralia without a single "adventure."
It was about the first of October when he sailed, as a
man before the mast, in the emigrant ship Janssen, Tasman,
from London for Melbourne.
It was about the fifteenth of January when the ship en-
tered the mouth of the Yarra-Yarra.
The English almanac declared it to be then midwinter.
The aspect of nature proved it to be midsummer in the land
to which our adventurer had come.
Melbourne was thickly crowded in the beautiful little
valley in which the city had been first laid out and thinly
scattered up the sides of the lovely, green-wooded hills that
formed its suburbs.
As soon as Duplicate Hawke received his pay and his
discharge he made his way into the city, to find out what
was going on and how he should employ or advantage him-
self.
He found that there was a great deal going on over and
above the usual intense activity of one of the very busiest
cities, if not the very busiest, on earth.
Wondrously like London on a small scale, and with its
face washed, looked this city of the Antipodes to our wan-
derer; there was the same sort of streets, houses, shops,
banks, churches, crowds of mixed pedetrians hurrying to
and fro, ragged boys, importunate beggars, uniformed po-
licemen, et cetera.
In addition to its normal great bustle, Melbourne was



<pb n="188"/>
188          A TORTURED HEART
now undergoing one of those periodical attacks of mental
fever to which she was peculiarly subject whenever the
exciting news of the discovery of fresh gold fields spread
a spiritual malaria over the city.
Duplicate Hawke hurried along Victoria Street, elbowed,
pushed, shoved, and dragged by the surging crowd pressing
to and fro. He had no particular reason to hurry. He
was then only on his way to the Bank of Australia to get a
ten-pound note changed into sovereigns and shillings, but he
caught the spirit of the crowd and "tore" along as if life
and death depended on his speed also.
He reached the bank at last.
It was crowded, like every other place, with men who
had "business on their hands."
Duplicate Hawke caught himself wondering if all the
dwelling houses in the city were not emptied of all their
inhabitants except women and children.
He had to wait half an hour before he could get his ten-
pound note changed into more convenient silver and gold.
When this was done he left the bank and went direct to
a barber's shop, saying to himself:
"I must not let my hair and beard grow, even out here,
and I must not abuse my skin. A clear complexion, a
smooth chin and well-trimmed head will enable me to defy
identification."
The barber's shop was not crowded. That seemed a won-
der. Our traveler sat down in a chair and heaved a sigh
of relief as he said to the knight of the brushes:
"I want my hair trimmed and beard shaved."
The barber commenced operations-shears and tongue
going at the same time.
"Of course, you have heard the news," he said, as a crisp,
black curl fell under his scissors.
"Not I. I have just arrived by the Janssen Tasman,"
replied Duplicate.
"Ah, indeed! A crowd have come over by her, I hear.
Going to the diggings?"
"Perhaps; I don't know. I have been there before.
Never was one of the lucky ones. At Black Creek Gully
sunk a shaft two hundred feet deep and reached the bed
rock only to find it a shiccr, while the men all around me
were getting up bottom that yielded from one to ten ounces



<pb n="189"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    189
the panful. That was always my luck. But what is your
news?" inquired Duplicate Hawke.
"Why, the richest gold field as has ever yet been dis-
covered I At least, so 'tis said; but it is true that they say
the same of every fresh find," cautiously added the com-
municator.
"Where is it?" eagerly demanded the adventurer, his in-
terest rising.
"At Dead Maiden's Brook, about a hundred and fifty
miles from here."
"When was it discovered?"
"Not more than a fortnight ago, and now there ain't less
than two thousand people on the spot, and they are still
rushing on."
"They will soon work the field out, at that rate."
"Not in a hundreds years they won't  At least, so 'tis
said; but they say anything."
"Who found the gold there?"
"A fellow as wasn't looking for it-a teamster on his
way from Yat-Yat to Jingibour. One of his oxen stumbled
and fell upon his knees. Teamster and boy went to see
what was the matter and help the ox to his feet; found a
yellow knob 'bout as big as a door handle sticking up
through the ground; saw it was gold in a minute; helped
the brute to his feet and then dug up the gold-proved to
be a solid nugget of two hundred weight, which was seventy
pound, troy weight; better than the biggest nugget ever
found yet. At least, so 'tis said; but they say anything."
"Which was the biggest nugget ever found ?"
"That of Balarat-weighed a hundred and thirty pounds,
troy weight, so 'tis said; but they say anything, you know."
"Why do they call that brook 'Dead Maiden's' ?"
"Because there was a young girl belonging to Yan Borek
Station lost in the bush for many days, and whose body
was found drowned in that brook, which never had a name
until that accident gave it one. So 'tis said; they say any-
thing but their prayers, you know. Well, sir, there you
arel" concluded the barber, as he gave the last finishing
touched to his customer and removed the sheet from around
him.
"There is a great rush to the new field," observed our
traveler, as he paid his bill.



<pb n="190"/>
190          A TORTURED HEART
"Thank you, sir. Oh, I tell youl"
"Why don't you go yourself? Why do you ply this slow
trade while you might be digging up nuggets of a hundred-
weight each ?" demanded Duplicate.
"And mightn't, sirl See your own ill luck. If my trade
is slow, it is also safe and sure."
"True. Well, good-day and good custom to you,"
laughed Duplicate Hawke, as he walked out of the shop.
He made up his mind to go to the new gold fields-not
that he expected to find the precious metal there himself.
Luck had always been against him, and luck would always
be against him, in that direction, at least, he thought; but
he would go to the new fields to enter into that sphere of
intense excitement and extreme activity in which he always
felt his own vitality raised to a delirious height.
He determined that he would start that very day. He
knew the indispensables of his outfit, and only the indispen-
sables would he take. He began at once to gather them
together.
He went first to a "boot, shoe, and leather shop," and
purchased a pair of miner's long top bots, and a miner's
full suit of yellow buckskin blouse and trousers, and an
india-rubber blanket. Next he went to a "hardware store,"
where he bought a shovel, a pick, a chain, a coil of rope, a
bucket and a pan.
Finally he took all these articles to a cheap "sailors'
boarding house," where he engaged a small room for a few
hours, dressed himself in his miner's suit and long boots,
and ordered his dinner.
After that he put his movable property in as compact a
shape as possible by tying his pick and shovel together and
throwing them over his shoulder, with all his other effects
dangling from them. His sailor's tarpaulin hat served ad-
mirably well for his journey, and thus completed his cos-
tume.
So he set out to seek his fortune.
He did not even have to inquire his way; he had only
to follow a group of men, dressed and equipped somewhat in
the same style as himself, and who were leaving the city by
North Street.
There were several necessaries with which Duplicate
Hawke had not yet provided himself, and among them was



<pb n="191"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    191
a mate. In working a shaft, three mates were desirable-
one was indispensable; but our traveler hoped to pick up
one or more, either on the road or at the new diggings.
So he tramped on alone, nor did he seek to overtake and
join his fellow travelers until they had left the city boun-
dary behind them.
The sun had sunk below the Western horizon, and
"The shades of night were falling fast,"
when he came up with the group, who had reached the top
of a green hill and had sat down to rest for a few minutes.
"Hello, mates! Bound for the diggings?" demanded
Duplicate Hawke, stopping and throwing himself down
beside them with the freedom of his caste.
"Bound for the dickens, if the new gold field does not
turn out any better than some that have been lately bragged
on," answered a red-bearded man, with a loud laugh, iln
which the others joined-probably with no better reason
than the love of laughter.
"Like myself, you seem to prefer to travel by night,:'
remarked Duplicate, taking his pouch of tobacco from his
pocket and passing it around.
The men helped themselves without returning thanks-
as they would not have expected thanks had they treated a
crowd-and while they filled their pipes the first speaker
said, in reply to Duplicate's observation:
"Yes, we walk by night, because in a climate like this, in
such weather as this, it is the easiest way and the quickest,
also."
"And we make better time in the cool nights than we
could in the hot days," added another of the men, as he
struck a match and lighted his pipe.
"You'll see that as we go along, when we overtake and
pass other pedestrians who walk only by day," put in a
third man.
"Say, now," began the first speaker, "that we start as we
did, at six o'clock in the afternoon, and walk by easy stages,
with occasional stops for rest or food, until nine o'clock
to-morrow morning, we shall have walked for fifteen hours
and got over about thirty miles, more or less. We will then
eat and lie down to sleep through the hottest part of the



<pb n="192"/>
192          A TORTURED HEART
day; wake up about five o'clock in the afternoon, wash, eat,
and get ready to start at six on our second day's journey.
Traveling in this manner, day after day, we shall easily
average thirty miles a day; and as this is Monday evening,
and Dead Maiden's Brook is one hundred and fifty miles
off, we shall reach it on Saturday morning and have all day
Sunday to rest and look about us. What do you think?"
he inquired of the newcomer.
"I think your plan a good one," replied Duplicate Iawke.
'"And now, mates, we will go on. Five minutes at the top
of a hill is all we need allow ourselves. What do you
think ?"
"I quite agree with you," said Duplicate, smiling at the
repetition of the question, as he arose to his feet and shoul-
dered his traps.
They walked on, two by two, in a regular line of march.
There were eight men in all-Duplicate Hawke making the
eighth.
The red-bearded giant who had been the first spokesman
of the party walked beside Duplicate Hawke and led the
way.
"Are you quite willing that I should join your party?"
inquired our adventurer.
"Why shouldn't we, be, mate? 'The more the merrier,'
you know."
"Ay, but there is a sequel to that proverb-'The fewer
the better cheer,'" laughed Duplicate.
"Oh, I know there be narrow-minded, short-sighted dig-
gers who, when they have found a new field, act like school-
boys who have come upon a blackberry bush-want to have
it all to themselves, and try to keep off a rush; when, if
the field is really good for anything, a rush is the best thing
that can happen to it for its development. Come on, mate,
and welcome! You have as much right as anybody else,"
said the leader; and they plodded on good-humoredly to-
gether, those behind talking one with another on their own
affairs.
Duplicate Hawke gathered from their conversation that
they were all natives of his own county of Cornwall, and,
with one or two exceptions, they were all Cornish miners
come out to Australia to seek their fortunes in the gold
regions.



<pb n="193"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    198
"By the way, mate," said the leader, "if it be a civil ques-
tion, what is your name? You needn't mention it if you
do not like."
"My name is Duplicate Hawke," gravely replied our ad-
venturer.
"Dupe-what?" demanded his companion, between a
frown and a smile.
*'-Licate Hawke," solemnly continued the traveler. "I
was a twin. Two of us born within an hour of each other
on St. Valentine's Day. Elder brother named Valentine in
honor of the saint. Younger brother-that was me-called
Duplicate, because he was a duplicate, and nothing else. Do
you see?"
"I see; but I never heard of such a thing in all the days
of my life!" exclaimed the miner, bursting into a loud
laugh.
"You may call me Dupe, however, if you like. It is quite
as appropriate to me as the other name. I was a duplicate.
I have also been a dupe on several notable occasions-the
last like to have cost me my life, and has left me a scar
that I shall carry to my grave," said the traveler, raising
his hand to the upper part of his forehead that was under
his hat.
"Ah   'Thereby hangs a tale.' Will you tell it, to while
away the hour ?"
"Not now. Some time, perhaps. But I will enlighten
you thus far: I was not the dupe of any man or of any
woman on the occasion I refer to. I was the dupe of my
own pride and vanity. But now, friend, what is your name,
if you please?"
"I was only waiting to see if you took interest enough
in me to ask. My name is George Traverse. My people
came originally from Hawkeville. I have an uncle there  i
now. He is the land steward of the estate of Hawkewood,
and I have a brother who is in holy orders, though you
might not think it to look at me. He is the Rev. Paul
Traverse, and is a curate in the parish of St. James, in Ber-
mondsey, London. I am a miner, and the son of a super-
intendent of mines. My father is gone to the better world.
He gave his two sons-the parson and myself-each a good
education. That took all his savings. He left no money.



<pb n="194"/>
194          A TORTURED HEART
Paul got his curacy, and I came out here to seek my fortune
in the gold mines."
"I hope you have found it," said Duplicate Hawke,
speaking very sincerely, though he only spoke by way of
making some response to the communication of his com-
panion; for, in truth, his mind was filled with surprise
and dismay at the discovery he had just made, or, rather,
at the revelation which had just been made to him.
"Not yet. I have not been lucky. May fare better next
time," answered the miner, with a smile.
"You say you have an uncle in Hawkeville. Have you
ever visited him there?" inquired Duplicate Hawke, in a
panic; for he was ignorant of how much or how little the
Cornish miner might know of the homicide at Hawke Hall.
"Never set foot in ]awkeville, or saw my uncle in the
whole course of my life. Never even corresponded with
him. My father left Hawkeville when he was a young man,
and married, and ever after lived in Clanwyd; and, without
ill will, the brothers just drifted apart and became es-
tranged from each other. Paul, however, got his first curacy
there, but he did not keep it long. He left it for a more
active field of labor in Bermondsey. By the way, mate,
you speak like a Cornishman."
"I am a Cornishman," replied Duplicate Hawke.
"Oh, I thought so. Then, what part, if I may inquire?"
"Demondike," replied the traveler, after a little reflec-
tion.
"Ah I I never heard of that place. An all-savored name,
er, mate?"
"The place has a foolish legend that it was made by de-
mons in one night."
"Oh!" said the Cornishman, and then he sank into
silence.
They walked on over a rough road, up and down hill,
under the night sky. It was not, however, a gloomy night,
though there was no moon; for the dark, purple, immeas-
urably transparent sky was studded thickly with the great,
splendid stars of the Southern hemisphere.
When they required rest they would sit down for about
five minutes, usually on the top of some hill. Then they
would rise and go on again.
After midnight their way lay through a dense forest,



<pb n="195"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     195
where all was so still, so breathless, in the midsummer
night, that even the wild beasts that infested it by day
seemed absent, dead or asleep.
So passed the hours.
The earliest dawn of morning found them still in the
forest, still plodding on through what seemed little more
than a "brush track" through the dense thicket.
When the coming sun had reddened the eastern horizon,
they emerged from the forest upon a stony plateau, where
the trees were stunted and far apart.
Here they came upon a very pleasant family scene in the
open air.
Two tilted wagons with covers white as sonw; four strong
young bullocks tethered to the trees; a group of chattering
and laughing men, women, and children, and a "gypsy"
fire with a teakettle hanging over the blaze, and a frying
pan on the coals, and the appetizing fragrance of boiling
coffee and frying ham diffusing itself through the fresh
morning air.
This party were evidently of those who preferred to
travel by day and sleep by night; but, then, they did not
have to travel on foot, which made all the difference.
They had evidently just risen from their night's rest in
the wagons, and were preparing to breakfast, and set for-
ward on their journey.
Some of the women were laying a cloth on the stony
ground, and bringing cups, saucers, and plates, knives and
forks and spoons from the wagons, to arrange upon it.
Others were cutting bread, while others again, at a dis-
tance from the breakfast arrangements, were spreading out
their bedding that it might be aired before being rolled up
and re-packed into the wagons.
The men were engaged in feeding the bullocks and water-
ing them from a little stream that ran gurgling over the
stones and through the camping ground.
Children were flying about everywhere, picking the wild
flowers that grew along the stream or under the trees, or
anywhere where there was soil and moisture enough to sus-
tain them, or chasing the brilliant moths and butterflies
with which the wilderness abounded.
It was a delightful scene to come upon after a night's
weary walk. Sight, hearing, smell, were all saluted with



<pb n="196"/>
196          A TORTURED HEART
pleasant views, sounds, and scents; mind and heart were
gratified by the presence of sweet human affections, and
interests found suddenly in desert places.
CHAPTER XXI
MEETING AN OLD IFRIEND
THE walking party and the camping party perceived each
other in the same instant, and set up a simultaneous shout
of greeting.
"Throw down your swag, mates, and stop and get some
breakfast with us. Here, mother! Put another gallon of
water and half pound of coffee into the kettle. We have
got company!" cried a stalwart, brown-bearded man of
middle age, who seemed to be the leader of this gang.
"Thank you very kindly, mate; but here are eight of  ;!
us-a formidable number to add to your domestic circle,"
replied George Traverse, with a doubtful glance toward
his companions, and a longing one toward the steaming,
fragrant coffeekettle.
"I wish there were sixteen of you! The kids would be
safer from the blacks. Ground your swag, now, without
more jaw !"
"Do you keep boarders, then?" inquired Traverse, who,
seeing that his companions had thrown down their burdens
and seated themselves upon the ground, concluded to accept  '
the invitation.
"Do we keep boarders? Say, Nell, my dear, do we keep
boarders ?" 
"No!" very decidedly responded a young woman in a
brown calico suit and a straw hat, who stood leaning over
a piece of bacon that she held resting upon the shaft of a
wagon, while with a sharp carving knife and a strong hand
she was slicing additional rashers.
"No, you see; but we entertain strangers now and then,
according to the Scriptures. Don't we, Nell?"
"Yes," responded the taciturn woman in the straw hat,
cutting away vigorously.
"But, of course, you will permit us to pay you, as we are
such a large party ?" suggested Traverse.



<pb n="197"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    197
"That is as may be. If you are all flush and it concerns
your conscience, why, you eight may make up half a sov.
among you. Your grub won't cost us a penny more, and
we don't want to make money off you. But if you are not
flush, you shall be welcome all the same, mind you."
"All right, mate. We are flush enough for that, and we
return you hearty thanks, for we have nothing better than
cold meat and bread in our pack; and a square breakfast,
including coffee, will be a godsend to us."
"Well, there, then, we have had too much jaw over such
a trifle, anyhow. There with me are my two brothers and
three brothers-in-law, all single men; my two sons, hearty
lads of fourteen and fifteen; my wife, there, who don't look
as if she was the mother of twelve children, do she, now ?"
inquired the leader, jerking his thumb over his shoulder to
indicate the woman who was still slicing bacon.
"Shouldn't take the lady to be more than twenty-five,"
said Duplicate Hawke, who had kept silent and in the back-
ground longer than it was his habit to do.
"Add ten years to that, and you will be all right. She's
thirty-five. I'm forty-rather advanced in life to go seek-
ing my fortune in the gold mines, but it is for the lads'
sakes. And, then, there are my two oldest daughters, Ann
and Jane, twins, seventeen years of age; and then these stair
steps," added the man, with a laugh, as he pointed to a
group of children, who had left off flower pulling and fly
chasing to come and stand and stare at the strangers-"then
these stair steps are boy and gal, one after the other, from
thirteen year old dow nto three. The two youngest-eight-
een months and six months old-are asleep in the wagon."
"You have 'a quiver full of them,' " said George Tra-
verse.
"Oh, ay! the blessed wise has blessed me with a blessed
baby every blessed year of our blessed marriage! The
house of Jones is not like to run out in our time. We are
all Joneses here. I was a Jones and I married a Jones.
Not a cousin, however. We were of no kin to each other,
though we bore the same name. And we men are most of
us Jims, or Johns, of Toms. And the women are Nells,
Anns or Janes. No fancy names among us! What might
yours be, mate?" inquired the talkative Jones, turning to
our adventurer.



<pb n="198"/>
198         Wa TORTURED) HEART
"Well, mine might be John Smith, or anything you 
please-but it is Duplicate Hawke," replied the latter, with :
a smile.                        . 
"Dupe-what?" inquired Jones, in the selfsame words :
and tone in which the question had been twice before asked. 
"-Licate Hawke," answered the traveler, with gravity; 
adding, in explanation, the little romance he had already  :
invented to explain his possession of the strange alias he 
had chosen. 
,"Humph! Well! Our first children were twin gals, as 
I told you. I named the eldest Ann,; but I'd like to seen at
the mother's face if I had called the youngest Duplicate, 
-or Duplicata, either! Though, to be sure, we might have ;i
shortened it to Kate. But, there! the wife is calling us to :>i
breakfast. Let us go," said Mr. Jones, leading the way to t
the-tablecloth, followed by all his companions and guests.: :
There was not room around the six-foot square of white 
linen for the large company that were to be provided for; '
but the mother and her two grow  daughters sat down by,'l
the huge coffeekettle and the pyramids of fried bacon 'ani, '
cut bread-not to be first to devour the viands before themi, :
but rather to fill the cups and plates and hand them to the&|
children, who distributed them among the men seated on;
the ground.                       . 
There were not cups and saucers enough to go around.:i
and their number had to be supplemented with bowls, cans, i
and porringers. 
But before the meal was over everybody was abundantly
satisfied and refreshed. 
Then came the washing up of crockery ware, spoons, anti }
cutlery, and its packing into hampers to be. stowed in one-!
of the wagons; and next came the gathering and rolling u^l
of the bedding to be put away in the other Wagon.  ':
Finally the bullocks' were harnessed up, and the womeii:l
and children hoisted in, and the procession was ready toi
start.' 
"We men walk beside the wagons and drive the bullocks 
most of the time, but take it by turns to get in one of the I.;:
wagons along of the women, and children, and pots, and' 1;
kettles, when we want a rest. Now, mates, if you have a  ;
mind to travel in our company, you can each have a lit,
: A



<pb n="199"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     199
now and then," said Peter Jones to George Traverse and his
companions.
"I thank you heartily in the name of myself and all of
my comrades. We will walk with you a couple or three
hours, and then we must lie by until evening. We have
walked all night," said Traverse, gratefully.
"Oh, I see! You are fly-by-nights, owls, bats! Well,
every man to his taste. As for us, we like to travel by day
and sleep by night. Hello ! Who have we here ?"
The question was excited by the appearance of a troop of
horsemen that came clattering out of the woods. A dezen
or more they seemed to be, and, by their dress and equip-
ment, all miners or adventurers bound for the diggings, for
each man had his swag rolled into a large bundle and
strapped, and some had even pots, kettles, and pans
dangling from their saddle bows.
"Hello!" and "Hello!" were the first greetings ex-
changed between the new arrivals and the occupants of the
ground.
And then followed a volley of "chaffing" from the horse-
men as they clattered away, which is utterly unreportable
here.
"Ruffians !" indignantly exclaimed Peter Jones, when
they had clatteerd out of sight. "This here is the worst of
taking women and children along of us. But it is a choice
of evils."
No one answered him, and in a short time the wagons
were in motion, with the men walking beside them.
It was still early-but seven o'clock-and pleasant trav-
eling. The bullocks moved at a walking pace, and the
men, refreshed by rest, easily kept up with them.
They were going over a stony, undulating, open country,
where the ground was covered by a coarse grass and dotted
here and there with thickets of stunted oak.
As the sun rose higher in the heavens the heat increased
so that by nine o'clock it was very severe.
Still our pedestrians persevered for another hour, and
then Duplicate Hawke and his companions stopped short,
took leave of the Joneses, and let them go on before.
"We shall meet at the new fields, anyway," said Dupli-
cate Hawke to the kindly Peter.
"Before that, I expect. For, if you sleep through the



<pb n="200"/>
o00          A TORTURED HEART 
noonday while we are traveling, we shall sleep through the .' t
whole night while you are walking. Soyou may overtake us': .
and breakfast with us to-morrow morning," were the, words ' 
that Peter Jones threw back to his late guests as he walked :
beside his bullocks, cracking his long, black, snake-like .
whip.
As soon as they were left alone, Duplicate Hawke anda-::
his friends sought the shady side of a clump of trees a litthel:'1
off to the left of the beaten track, and there they unrolled::i:
and spread their blankets on the ground, and making their +:i
paceks into pillows, stretched themselves out full length and ,'.|
;yielded themselves up to a 'leep as deep and weet: .as ever',i
visited the frames of' wearied travelers.       ,   '
All day, long an endles procession of adventurers ini}
drays, in wagons, on horseback, or on foot, .traveled along':l Ni
the highway niear them without disturbing their repose .-,
hey migt have been aleepig under the round intea
of above it for all they knew of what was passing beside
them. 
A And, on the other hand, the travelere:  knew as little .Jof?
thiEr proximity for the th-icketof trees hid them completeyliy
frbm the passers-by on the highwayT-if, indeed, that coulti
be called a "'highway' which was: but little better than: aii
bush track.,                            - 
T .he sun was setting when the first one of the  party'W:
awoke. He was the oldest man there, and, consequently, h:
was the! lightest sleeper. He rubbed his eyes and tousj
himself, recalled his dormant. facuties, remembered wher.^s
he was, and began to shake up 'his comrades.   '
They were awakened with more difficulty; but on0ei
.aroused, they started up, full of life and actiity, washe42
their faces as if it had been sunrise, instead of sunset,' at
their cold bread and meat, drank water from  the littie?
spring in the heart of the thicket, rolled up their blanketis 
and strapped them on their backs, and left their shelter tfri
the highroad.                                -     'f*i
There a contrasting scene met them. A small group of,^i
pedestrians, who had been walking all day were kindgi;
a fire on the other side of the road, and spreading blae;ate S >;^
around it preparing to spending the night on the spot.  :'
The usual greetings passed between these men.   ,::
tr~~~~~~~~~~~~ &" N,



<pb n="202"/>
292          A TORTURED HEART
he had been, and so opposite in appearance to the printed
description of his person in the placards that offered a re-
ward for his apprehension, that he walked all the way from
Hawkeville to London unrecognized, except by one man,
the village doctor, who had years before that attended him
through a spell of illness, during which, as a beardless boy
with short hair and a pale face, he had looked as he looked
on the first morning of his flight, and so the doctor had been
enabled to recognize him."
"These doctors are the dickens," said Hice, sententiously.
"Ham Gow got away from this one, however, and he was
only once more in peril. It was when he heard that another
man, who closely resembled the printed description of him-
self, had been arrested in his place, and was really likely to
suffer in his stead. Then, indeed, he was prompted to give
himself up and run the risk of hanging for a man who was
alive and well, but whom he could not prove to be so, be-
cause he was ignorant of his whereabouts, or that of the
valet, Delaplaine, who was the only other person in their
confidence. But just as the poor tramp had made up his
mind to sacrifice himself, he learned that the man arrested
as Ham Gow had been identified as Jack Hice, the returned
convict."
"That was myself, you know," said the wounded man.
"Of course. So Ham Gow made good his escape to Aus-
tralia. He is now in the gold fields of Victoria, where I
parted with him more than a year ago, and from where I
got news of him scarcely a month since."
"Yes; but that eccentric young Earl of Hawkewood,
where is he?" inquired Hice, fixing his deep and burning
black eyes upon the narrator.
"He-that admirable young gentleman !-is also out here
in these colonies."
"How do you know?"
"Because I came out on the same ship with him, and trav-
eled all over Australia with him. I was traveling in his
company when I met Ham Gow in the gold fields."
"Ah !" said the convict, thoughtfully considering the case.
"Perhaps you are Mr. Delaplaine, his lordship's valet."
"No, not quite that; but I am a very intimate friend of
the excellent young nobleman."
"He is a good fellow, is he?" inquired Hice.



<pb n="203"/>
A -TOITUED HEART                    20o
they had seen looming ahead of them, through the semi-
darkness, a huge black mass that seemed to reach from east
to west, and from earth to heaven.
As the morning dawned slowly they began to recognize a
lofty mountain range whose vast front bristled with stunted
evergreens and sharp rocks.
At its base, like a crimson star, gleamed the watch fire
of some camping party.
"We shall have to stop here, mates, until sunrise. It
would be useless to attempt to find the pass of that moun-
tain in this obscure light," announced George Traverse.
His weary companions, much more fatigued by the rug-
gedness of their way than they had been on the previous
days, gladly assented to the proposal.
They went on a few yards further, however, until they
found a convenient place for resting; then they threw
down their swag, unrolled their blankets, and spread them
upon the ground, preparatory to stretching themselves at
ease.          .
"But we must build a fire," said George Traverse. "In
a place like this, it will never do to go to sleep without that
protection."
And he drew a box of matches from his pocket and began
to look around for combustible material.
There was none at hand. The stunted oak that grew
there was green and hard. There was no dry brush to; be
seen.                            : 
"I will look further," said Duplicate Hawke, who, .being
a trained tramp from his boyhood, was more accustomed
to continuous walks and less fatigued than his companions.
He left his party and walked toward the base of the
mountain. There he found a little dry brush scattered at
long intervals, and began to gather it.
In doing so he came up close to the watch fire their party
had seen from a distance.
A single man sat on the ground beside it; no other per-
son, no wagon, no bullocks, or horses were near.
On the approach of a stranger, the man at the fire sprang
up and presented his revolver, with the usual challenge:
"Who goes there?"
"A friend-a miner, as you are probably, bound for the
new gold fields-looking about just now for kindling wood.



<pb n="204"/>
204          A TORTURED HEART
Don't you see?" said Duplicate Hawke, holding up hii ,.
wisp of brush.            , ..
The watchman suddenly 4,oppe hia revolver, caught up ', 4
a burning and flaming brand from the fire, and held it close '
to the newcomer's face, exclaiming, excitedly: 
"Who are you? Your voice is familiar--your face-- ' 
Great Heaven, Ham Gowi"Y
"Hsh-sh-sh  my lord! Cut that name!     Would your   :?
lordship put a rope around my neck ?" demanded the tramp, : '<i
lost in amazement at the unexpected rencontre. 
, '"Cut my lord, if it comes to that!  I-m :Ham-ilton  ,i
.  Gow-er, at your service,e said the watchman.,  ' '  ::i
:    Oh ! I beg your pardon, sir! . mistook you for a noble:
earl I had once the honor to serve in the old country. I am ::i;
happy to.make your acquaintaene, Mr. Ham --ilton Gow--:' .
er! Allow me :to introduce myself-Dupliate Hawke at ;ia
y' ;  our ordersl" :              : :'           :    ;'
"Dupe--what?' demanded the watehman, in the identi:-:i'
cal words and tone im which the question had always been: : 
'  asked by others.                   :, :           ;.; !
"-Licate Hawke. There was another Hawke who hada a:i?
Christian name.- I    am his duplicate.'"  '''1;'
"Qh, I see! I see," laughed Hamilton Gower; 'but-how:.?!
is it that I find you here when I left you 'in the lap of 1x i..
ury,' 'rolling in wealth,' as the maid servants say? Did ywou :
Weary of iitall, as some one. ese did?  Was the ruling'g !
passion too strong for you? Did you bolt?"   .       '
"I did bolt my lor-Mr. Hamilton Gower, I mean-hufti4: >
I didn't bolt because I was tired 'of grandeur, or anziou-.^'i:
to resume my roving over the world, I bolted to save ,my ij
:   neck."                                               i1-  4 ';
'"What? PHow was that?"'      . 
"I had to fly for my life, my lord-Mr. Hamilton Gow-:t
er. i was charged with your lordsip's--with the Earl  4:'!
'iHawkewood's murder."'                  .           i ,'
" Oh-h-h! I perceive," muttered the watchman, after 4.f'??
pause. "You could not play your part! The earl was mis*r ?:{H
ing, and naturally enough you were suspected of havin,:: .i?
made away with him. I had no idea I had left you exposoi' &.".;
to such peril, though I ought to have thought of it,. mjt;':^l5
poor Ham-     "                                       .'
"Dupe, sir."                                       .
-;;''
$,4'. 



<pb n="205"/>
-  - ATOURTUlEPS {E AIW
"Why didn't you explain?"
"Couldn't, sir. tTe  e. '*a found dead in his bed.", 
"Eh I" exclaimed UMr .owr, with his eyes Open to their
widest extent., ''                           ' 
"It is a fact, eir, and the coroner' jury bought in a ver-
diet of willul mirder agaist me and your--ai lordsaip's
"Man what iad iale i .this yu re telig me ?
"A mad tal e nough, b  a: true one, 'll the sane, my.
lord--M. :       :wer,  m .:lting  dead 'ILong li've:...
the king I'.; .he;mogt meint:'o :ra   awke, sixateenthi. :'. ':.
Earl of 'awke  dts .set up  : l   ie  Chch. d      :4
Ikesw  a MonG sevetent EBrl 'o 'Hawkewodtti]kgr- s in:-
his  stead.1 ' ?  '   '      '  ;,  E    ;^    .
Mt Eailton G        =.ower v  n Not g^ ntko powity; he ; d
beesn:pg :peiu ::l eghf' tpby. d, or A -tf i;'t l t U bi ;th  1
occasionieX re hiesd stmt     ult angag;utry T
reportabelel' con:vu^;d withthi'e- but :q:eto
.Bere -tpticate :iawe  o   repl yif aEsri- -, p   .e 
cutlir to th. bis" of Auititl, v wa s heard: . .I .::'
"Coo-el.             H   if-s calling we. I will ru
a8nd miet ;h  ad give 1  thi-s l;indlig, an :be hack i a'  -
trie ' exclaimed t)pliate  wke, ash    ed and r
iC: Co   called :the vi:cj   widetnes agan.: th "i 
"doo-ee"'resBoned, Itawke^ fningtoward it;.
Ngt a' hunir6.d yards off.he me' Georee TraveTe urry,:.
ing toWard him.  . ':  ;    .            :          i:
iiThought you were 'st! :ex  imedi: li:t .       ,..
"Nob. Met :a friend from the old c:utry. Man ati watch
fire over there. he 'is qutee alone. Im Imgomng bak:to him 
to share his watch and have 9 talk. Will see youagai t after
an hour or so. Here's your kinig, and a plenty of it, 
said Duplicate Hawke, hurriedly; and he; puhed hii bundle
of biruh 'ino the arms Of his mate, and: tured' and strode
back to the' watch fire where Mr. Hfamilton (ower, with un-
controllable impatience, awaited him.



<pb n="206"/>
206          A TORTURED HEART
CHAPTER XXII
REVEALING A MYSTERY                  .V
THE sun was rising when Duplicate HawKe got back, im-  h
der the shelter of the great mountain, where Mr. Hamilton 
Gower sat by his fading watch fire.                    ; *
Hawke burst into a loud laugh as he approached. 
"What is the matter with you?" testily demadned Mr. '
Gower.                                             . ,   :
"I beg pardon, my lord--"                         ' 
"Stow that and tell me what you were laughing at." 
To see your lordsh---I' Beg pardon again  To see you, 'i|
sir, looking so jolly like me in all particulars that we 
might be taken for twin brothers !" replied Mr. Hawke. 
"We are counterparts now certainly-having not only the: i 
same forms and the same features,' bat the same sunburned  ;
complexion, the same three months' growth of black beard; .
and the same miner's rig of yellow buckskin blouse and :
trousers," assented Mr. Hamilton Gower, 
"I say, my lo-Mr.Hamilton Gower, I mean--when T?:i 
first fell in with the party below there, they naturaly .;
wanted to know my name, and, having made a present ofd 'id
my own name, I borrowed another, or rather invented one,; 
anld told them that I was called Duplicate Hawke, because:' 
I was the second of a pair of twins born on St. Yalerntine s:
Day; that the first twin was named in honor of the saint, I
and the second Duplicate, because he was nothing. but a:;
duplicate. I think, sir, I had better introduce you to my . 
mates as my elder twin brother." 
"Hia, haha   Well thought of, Ham:!"
"Dupe, if you please, my 1-sir!"
".Dupe, then! But we must think before we speak, or we -i
shall be betraying each other !"
"Yes, sir.'                           .;
"And now tell me what I am so anxious to know: What: 
happened after we parted at Hawke Hall?"            r
"Well, my lord-beg pardon. I will remember after a
while."
"I hope you will, but go on."          ..
"Well, sir, I should tell you, in the first place, that if I 
"di 
' :'j 



<pb n="207"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     207
had been in my sober senses I should never have consented
to play a part that I must have known I could not carry
out successfully."
"Were you not in your sober senses?"
"By no means, my lord-beg pardon again ! It will come
after a while!"
"I think we had better not join your mates until it does
come right."
"Oh, no fear, sir! As soon as we are with them caution
will be in the ascendancy."
"I trust so. Go on."
"I said I was not in my right senses, sir, when I agreed
to play the part I did, sir, or else I should never have ven-
tured on a performance that came near costing me my life
in more ways than one."
"But why do you say that you were not in your sober
senses ?" 
"Because I know I wasn't sir. You see, while I was wait-
ing for your-while I was waiting for you to send for me
to your rooms the butler employed me washing glasses in
the pantry. Such loads of glasses came out of the supper
room, many of them half or a quarter full of wine! Now I
never had been used to wine, but I hated to pour so much
good stuff down in the sink, so I drained every glass before
I washed it, and so, whether it was from the quantity of
the wine I drank, or the mixture of so many sorts, it made
me crazy and reckless."
"I did not perceive that you were drunk," said Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower.
"No, my lord, because I was not really drunk. I never
was drunk in my life; but ! was never so near it as that
night of your lordship's birthnight ball, when I washed
the wine glasses for the butler, and drained them before
doing so. I was just exhilarated up to the point of reck-
lessness."
"Now proceed with your story, and tell me what hap-
pened after I left you."
"Well, when you and your valet had left the room, and
the sound of your footsteps had died away along the cor-
ridor, so that I knew you had really gone and would not
turn back and detect me in my vanity, I crept out of bed,
lighted the wax candles, each side of the dressing glass, and



<pb n="208"/>
208          A TORTURED HEART
stood before it and contemplated my transfigured self- -my  ?' : 
delicate enameled complexion, my neatly trimmed and" 
dressed hair, my smooth chin, and my elegant mustache, . ,;:
and my dainty clothing-and I felt what a new and deli-  ;;i'
cious sense of life and enjoyment a perfumed bath and fine  ';:
white linen brought to a man. I bowed to myself in the  i;';.7
glass. I congratulated and complimented myself, and    7;
thought it was rather a good thing to be an earl." 
"I did not, you know," put in Mr. Hamilton Gower. 
"No, nor I-for very long, laughed Duplicate Hawke.; ,
WeXllt go on.                                         :
"After disporting myself a little longer before the glass  :
I went back to bed, drew the fine, fragrant sheets and soft . -
silken coverlet over my shoulders, and gave myself up to : ;
the enjoyment of the hour,t  ut the fumes of the wine   i
were passing off from me, and a reaction was setting in-. , 
xnot a sick one-my constitution was too sound,: and the .;
wine: was too good-but a sober and thoughtful reaction."  :i
A'.''A " ' interrupted  r. Bamilton Gower.  : 
"I began to wonder how   should;ever be able to play  ::1
the part I had undertaken, and why on earth I ever had
undertaken it ! But the 'delicios be and all the splendid  :
and luxurious surroundings were so delightful to mind .and
body that I determined to enjoy them, and put off the evil  l
day of detection and expulsion as long as possible.  ew
,that althfough I was transfigured' into a perfect' faesimile ":':
of your lordship, and although 1 eould subdue ,mt: voice,i
to your lordship's tone, and also that I could-thanks to: .,/:
the. parish school-speak fair English, yet b y  lmanyttle i ;
transgressions of conventionalities  I must inevitably betray :|
myself. I wonder your lordship did. not think of all this :,
yourself."'   ..               .            .
"I never thought of anything butplaying a practical joke ';
on my tiresome old tutor, and getting away from him,, '"i
laughed Mr. Hamilton Gower.    , '.
"Well. my lord," resumed Duplicate Hawkee.          '
"I suppose it is of no use to ask you again to drop ;.:
that title?" interrupted Mr. Gower.        ~ 
"Not in the least, your lordship. I cannot help it, you :::
see. The force of habit is too strong; but I will drop it dof 
necessity when I get.among my mates yonder." 
"Proceed.".                                     : '..
;:UIf



<pb n="209"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    o09
"I lay there thinking how I might contrive to enjoy the
delights of my new position as long as possible without
discovery, and I made up my mind how I would do it."
"Oh !"
"Yes, I did, my lord. I determined that I would keep
my bed the next day, and not allow the light to fall full
upon my face for fear of discovery-that in point of fact,
I would keep my bed as long as possible, and be waited on
in my room, and have my meals and books and wine
brought to me there, and never let in the full light, or
get up and walk about, except when I should be quite alone,
with the door locked."
"Well, you would have had a suite of three rooms to roam
throigh-bedroom, dressing room, and sitting room-so
you would not have been cramped for space, and might
have made yourself very comfortable," laughed Mr. Hamil-
ton Gower.
"So I thought. And I also thought that after the com-
pany should have left the Hall I might go downstairs and
walk and drive through the park, and even through the
neighborhood, and by caution and reserve successfully pass
myself off for your lordship, who was not very familiarly
known, even in your own neighborhood."
"No; Heaven knows that I was not."
"And then, by having the originally identical mold of
features between your lordship and myself heightened by
hair-dressing and enameling until the likeness between us
was perfect in the smallest detail, I was such a complete
facsimile to your lordship as would make my detection by
most persons impossible."
"Ay."
"With this pleasant prospect of enjoyment before me-
with the growing conviction that with caution I might per-
sonate your lordship for a long time yet to come, and, per-
haps, until your return on gaining your majority to claim
your own-I fell into a long, delicious sleep.
"I do not know how long I had slept when I was aroused
by a noise in my room of something falling, as if acciden-
tally knocked down.
"Then I instantly remembered that I had forgotten to
lock the door after you. I called out:
" 'Who is there?'



<pb n="210"/>
-10          A TORTURED HEART
"At the same moment a dark figure darted to my aide,
lifted a club, and dealt me a heavy blow, 
"There was a crashing sound through my head, a thuti .:
dering in my ears, a flashing light that seemed to set the  :i
room in a conflagration, and then all was darkness and:';':
oblivion." 
"What are you telling me? That there was an attempt-
made to murder you ?"' inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower,:
aghast.                            .             , .
"Yes.: An attempt that was very nearly successful.  I /
must have lain unconscious for several hours, for, when J.'
came to myself, 1 was laid out on a long table in the middle^i.,
of the floor of a long room, with six, tall windows opening&
\'  .~  ,,on  the ,lawn:"  ,  .'Y  :  : ' * ' '  ' : "  '
'That, wasth jusice rtie'oom.'  .     ,
. "FSo I had good reason to know. -.I: was So weak .whenI T2
recovered my consciousness that: I.could hardly -stir buti
mv ears were wide open, and. herd.a stir in thie ult:' e
end of the room, and then avoiee--a voice that: I kneii,
well enouEgh 't be the c'ron;er s, 'for I had heard it.oft'e>$i
enough in cases of ifound drowned' along the eoast---'
"Upperman's?'      .           -      . 
"      -  Yes,         my lororConerd :perman's. : Wel, m or i
waS asking: ..   .'          ,.
. ' ' Gentlemen, ~'have yo a made yo e uyour verdictP ?',- .'
" ,:And some one answeredas i Hfie was reading frrom ,
-  aper;. 
" 'We find that Horace Hawke, Earl of Hawkewo
came to his, death on the monmg of the second of Septel
ber from a blow on the. head by a blunt weapon held in th
hand 'of one Hami 'Gow, a tramp,; aided and abetted by: o
Henri Delaplaine, valet to the: deceased.'.       /
"Ha ha! ha! ha! ha '" laughed Mr. Hamilton Oowe
"I cannot help enjoying this, Ham  Seeiing you here  g
perfect safety, you know      - !"  '
"Well, I didn't enjoy it-at the time. I was weak
dizzy  , and, on hearing that strange verdict, I had an insiia 
idea that I should then and there be carried off to pii!
and eventually hanged for your murder." '.
"It did not occur to you then that you had personat&&
me, and, as the murdered earl, they had been holdiag *f
inquest on your body, supposing it to be mine?" 



<pb n="211"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   211
"No, not then; for I was dizzy and confused, and I re-
lapsed into unconsciousness almost immediately."
"What followed?"
"I don't know. Of course, the inquest must have ad-
journed, and the room must have been shut up, waiting the
arrival of the undertaker; for when I recovered conscious-
ness again the place was dark, or would have been but for
the moonlight shining through the slats of the window shut-
ters. Memory came slowly back to me.
"I could recall the blow that I had received, and which
had stunned me for so many hours. I could also recall
the momentary knowledge I had gained of the coroner's
inquest. And I understood it all, though imperfectly, for
I still had the impression that I was held in custody for
the murder of the Earl of IEawkewood, and I was anxious
to escape.
"I moved, slightly lifted my head, and divined, rather
than knew, that I was alone. I rolled over and let myself
roll off the table on to the floor.
"The shock did me good. I saw that all the windows
were hoisted, and I crawled to one of them and managed
to draw the bolt and open the shutters. Then I nearly
fainted from the reaction after the effort.
"The light of the late moon that rose near morning
streamed in through the open window, and showed me,
among other objects of interest, a decanter of brandy stand-
ing on a side table.
"If I could only reach that brandy, I thought; and I
crawled on all fours to the side table and helped myself to
my knees by holding on to its top, and so I got hold of that
decanter of brandy and took a good pull of it.
"It gave me strength. I tottered to my feet, and stag-
gered to the window and'went out through it to the lawn.
"With every step I seemed to gain strength. I turned
my steps toward the Ruined Tower, and-tottering, falling,
resting, rising-I managed to reach it by sun up. I reeled
into the strong room and into the presence of the two
women, and fell down for dead!"
"You must have startled them a little !" said Mr. Hamil-
ton Gower.
"I suppose I did! Anyway, when I came to my senses
I found myself in--in a secure hiding place known to



<pb n="212"/>
212          A TORTURED HEART
them. They had heard there was a warrant out against
me, and they kept me in that place and nursed me until I
got well."
:'It is strange the tower was not one of the first places
searched," said Mr. Gower.
"Bless your lordship, so it was! Not only searched, but
guarded by the police for about two weeks, until-ha! ha I
ha! ha! ha!" 
"What in the deuce is the matter now?" demanded Mr. 
Gower. 
"I beg your lordship's indulgence! I cannot help laugh- 
ing to think of it! You know that pious lot of Wesleyans
-Abbott and his crowd?" 
"Yes; what of them?" 
"They came home from a trip across ~the Channel, and 
as soon as they heard of the 'murder,' went to Hawke- 
wood Hall' and lodged information that on that same said 
second of September when the murder was said to have been
committed, they had unsuspeetingly taken Ham Gow aboard .i
their fishing craft, and that they had carried him over to
the coast of France, and left. him there at the little fishing 
hamlet of St. Rosalie! Ha-! ha !i ha! ha! ha! 
"Well, my lord, the police were drawn off from  the   i
Ruined Tower, and the hue and cry went to France after. 
me! Of course; it was your lordship who went over to .
the coast of France with Abbott and his me en?'       ,
"Not I, indeed! I never went with Abbott." 
"'No ?"
"Certainly not. I went in quite another direction  -  ,X
"Then who in the deuce could it have been? :There 'A
surely cannot be another living man who resembles me as  |
perfectly as your lordship honors me by doing-so per- ,
fectly as to have been mistaken for me by my oldest and
most intimate friends! If it were not your lordship, who 'i
could it have been?"                                  . 
"I don't know ! Go on with your narrative."
"Well, just as soon as the police were withdrawn from.: ;:
the house, I left the Ruined Tower and tramped to Lon'. .
don, without let or hindrance.
"Sickness, confienment, loss of blood had so bleached my  .i
complexion and emaciated my frame that, with my chin:   -
smoothly shaven and my hair trimmed, and in' a nieat; 
..... ,  ~   ~ ,
,  m ,



<pb n="213"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     13
sailor's dress, I passed everywhere in safety, looking so
unlike the burly, black-bearded, tawny-skinned ruffian I
was described to be, that I stood with other men in bar-
rooms and at crossroads reading the placards and posters
describing my person and offering a reward for my appre-
hension, unflinching and unsuspected! That description
was as good as a passport to me."
"It certainly must have been."
"Well, my lord, I had some adventures on my way to
London, and will tell you of them when we have more
time."
"Over the camp fires at the diggings, this coming au-
tumn."
"Exactly, my lord. But it is enough now to say that I
reached London safely, went down to the East India docks,
found the Janssen Tasman, ready to sail for Melbourne,
short of hands, shipped as a seaman for the voyage out, and
reached Melbourne only three days ago; heard of the new
rush, and started, with others, to seek my fortune at the
new fields.
"This is my third day's-march, and I have found you.
There, Lord Hawkewood, is my story. But as your lord-
ship did not cross the Channel with Abbott and his men,
who could have deceived them into the idea that they had
taken me across ?"
"I say I do not know. I say I went in the opposite di-
rection. After I had been so well gotten up as a tramp, by
the aid of a little walnut juice to embrown my complexion,
and a black wig and a false black beard (how lucky for my
enterprise that Delaplaine had these things in is possession
ever since he went to the opera masque ball as Fra Diav-
olo !) and your full suit of clothes, including shoes and hat,
I went boldly on to Hawkeville Station, took a third-class
ticket and got on board the 'parliamentary,' thinking my-
self secure from meeting anyone who had ever seen either
me or you before, for I never traveled third-class and you
never traveled by any class."
"Never was on a railway train in my life," put in Mr.
Duplicate Hawke.
"So I thought. And so I entered the third-class on the
parliamentary train for London, and felt myself secure
from any sort of recognition, for the seats were nearly all



<pb n="214"/>
214          A TORTURED HEAkRT
filled by laborers and artisans and their families. But I :'
was mistaken; for presently a gentleman in a clerical dress  ,.
got in, took the seat by my side, held out his hand, and said':
'Ah! Gow, my friend! i   am glad to see you   It is
long since we have met.' 
"'Very long, your reverence,' I growled, in as good an  :
imitation of your gruff voice as I could conmand, as I rec- , 
ogiized the parson as the Rev. Paul Traverse, a nephew ;
of our steward, and who had taken holy orders and been  '
appointed a curate to assist our aged reetor, some years :
before, but who, on the death of the latter and the succes-  ^
sion of Dr. Vincent, had gone to take a euracy in Bermond-  . i
sey, London. I had not seen him since.' He began to 'im- :
prove' the occasion and myself immediately ..
"'I hope yiu have given up your wandering life, my   -;
friend, he said.                               . 
' yes, yourr reverenie. I am going out to Australia, '
whiere there is a good, wicde ield for labor, and I am going  i
to settle down: to *ork I: replied.' ::  , 
" 'That is right, my friend. Btt do not go to the gold I:
fields. They are 'onl snares of0 the evil one for such is
You. Go toe                   the ceatte srion s f  runs;ecome: a 
drover or a shepherd; save your money, take up land and Ji
' begin to lead a good ad useful li fe.''            : ; 
"I.  . promised everything he required, andeverything else. ?,b
And he became so tell satisfied with m'e that when we goit 'ii
to Lond on he insisted on seeing me aboa:rd the emigrantii'|
ship and recommeding meto the speial care of the chapt .;?
.   lain there 'g           r ,\    ; eJ'i .
The ship sailed the same day, and after a four months':  |
fair voyage reached Melbourne about two week' ago.  :
"I loitered about the town for some days, and started on J
foot for the new gold fields--justto see a novel phase of 'I
life, you know."'
"Of course I know. But, my lord, I hope in your own  i.t
terests that you succeeded in bringing over safe, and tbe':
stowing safe, the large amount of money and jewelry that'.
-ha ! ha! ha !-I am charged with having robbed you 1".; '
"Oh! yes, all but about fifty pounds lodged safely in 
Bank of Australia to the eredit of Hamilton Gower."   i '
"And now, my lord, will you tell me what became at
Henri Delaplaine? He never reappeared in Hawkeile -4,  A'



<pb n="215"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    215
fortunately for him, for there was a price on his head as
well as on mine."
"The good Mr. Delaplaine walked with me on my road
from  Hawkewood Hall to Hawkeville Station until we
came to the Belle Isle Ferry, when Mr. Delaplaine bade me
adieu, thanked me for the hundred-pound note I put in his
hand, and got on the ferryboat to cross to the island. I
'think there was an attraction at the castle in the person
of Mademoiselle Labbe, the French lady's maid."
"Labb6 disappeared the same day," said Mr. Duplicate
Hawke.
"Ah! that explains it. Well, I have never seen or heard
of my worthy valet since that notable morning.",
"I dare say they are chorus singers on the operatic stage
somewhere."
"More than likely. But, Gow, you said that my worthy
cousin, Lewis Manton, had succeeded to the title?"
"Certainly, my lord. 'The king is dead! Long live the
king !' What else could have happened, after it was found
by the coroner's inquest that I had murdered the Earl of
Hawkewood, but that his heir presumptive should have
succeeded to the title and estates ?"
"Yes, but, my good Mr. Duplicate Hawke, the Earl of
Hawkewood had given the lie to the coroner's quest verdict
by coming to life again and walking out of the French win-
dows, and going about his business. Say, Gow  what hap-
pened after your disappearance from that death room?"
"At the Hall, you mean ?"
"At the Hall, of course, since you told me what hap-
pened to yourself."
"Ha ! ha! ha !  ha! ha ! They thought the earl's body had
been 'snatched !' Large rewards were offered for its recov-
ery, or for any information that would lead to its recovery!
Several medical schools were investigated! The row was
at its very height when I left, you must know! I dare say,
before this, some body has been found and'manipulated,
and restored and interred with all the honors as that of the
late Horace Hawke, sixteenth Earl of Hawkewood !"
"No doubt. And Lewis Manton reigns at Hawkewood
Hall! Well! Let him reign for a year longer, until I have
my frolic out and reach my majority! Then I will go back



<pb n="216"/>
216          A TORTURED HEART                        /4
with you and Delaplaine and my indelible birthmark to 
claim my rights and eject interlopers !"
"I will return with you, of course, my lord! But how
will you be. able to lay your hands upon Delaplaine, if you
do not know where he went?"
"I have his solemn pledge to meet me at Hawkewood
Hall, on my twenty-first birthday. And 1 know, if he live,
he will keep his word! But what movement is that I see
among your friends below?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower, 
as he held a pocket telescope up to his eye, and squinted 
through it at the party gathered around the watch fire,
further down.
CHAPTER XXIII
IN THE NEW GOLD FIEFLDS  ;
"I THINK they are preparing breakfast ! By the way, i-
their leader, George Travers, is a brother of your parson; .
but he has never been in iawkeville, and knows next- to. :
nothing of his relations there!"                   . ; 
" Another Cornwall man out here"  ' 
-    "Lots of them"                    ' . 
"How small and crowded the earth is, after all! People: X:
cannot even go to the Antipodes without meeting other W;.!
people whom they have either known or heard of !" said Mr. i
Hamilton Gower. 
"That is really true; but these men are a good sort. Shall (
we join them?" 
"If you like."          '
"And since I have told a yarn about a twin brother, :.
and since your lordship does me the distinguished honor to :
resemble me, shall I introduce you as that esteemed elder :?
twin brother?"                                      .i
"You may. All men are brethren, for that matter! But.:::
in the meantime stow the lordship !" 
"Indeed, indeed, I will, my lord! And this is the very:?;
last time your lordship's title shall pass my lips until we, '
return to England, when 'the king shall enjoy his own]:.; 
again "' said Mr. Duplicate Hawke, as he arose and led thli: -'
y s*



<pb n="217"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     17
way through the thorny thicket to the camp fire around
which his companions were busy getting their rude al fresco
breakfast.
"Oh! you're back, are you, Hawke ! We thought you had
deserted us !" exclaimed two or three in the same words, or
in words to the same effect.
" Oh, no, mates I  have brought you a valuable recruit !
I told Mr. Traverse that I had unexpectedly met a friend
from the old country. But little did he suspect-what I
hadn't time to explain then-that my 'friend from the old
country' was no other than that same honored twin brother
of whom I boasted to you all, and of whom I am only the
humble 'duplicate I' But you will see what an honest,
faithful copy I am when you look upon him! Mates! let
me make you acquainted with my elder brother, the son
and heir of our distinguished family--Mr. Valentine
Hawke."            ' 
Mr. Valentine Hawke lifted his hat with a grace all his
own, and gave a hand to the extended digits of Mr. George
Traverse, who welcomed him in the name of the company.
"Where in the black demons is the can of condensed
milk? It is never good for anyting unless it is stirred in
the pot while the coffee is coming to a boil !" demanded the
chief cook of the'party, ruthlessly interrupting these cour-
tesies and upsetting everybody in his search for the missing
luxury. 
The jar was found at last, and the preparations for the
breakfast went on to full completion.
Then the party, now increased to nine by the addition
of Mr. Valentine Hawke, sat down on the ground to regale
themselves with hot coffee, toasted bread and butter, and
fried sausages.
None ate of this coarse food with keener relish than the
daintily-nourished Mr. Valentine Hawke.
Mr. Duplicate watched him with admiring delight, and
surprised him agreeably by suddenly exclaiming; .
"You enjoy this sort of life, Brother Val!"
(There was no word of "lordship" now.)
"Greatly," replied Mr. Hawke.
"Ah! Tramping all day and camping all night gives one
an appetite, eh?" demanded Mr. George Traverse-"though
we reverse the rule by tramping all night and camping all



<pb n="218"/>
218.         A TORTURED HEART 
day! Or, we have done so until this morning. Now, how- :
ever, I fear that we must tackle:that mountain barrier be-'::':
fore us by daylight  We could never get over by night," he: ': 
added.                        .                        '
"Never," assented several of the party. 
When the morning meal was over, and the pans and cans, ;;-
and remnants of food were repacked, the party resumed: :::
their march.  .        ,
They soon reached the.foot of the mountain and began :: ;
the ascent.        ' 
But who shall describe the dangers 'and difficulties of 
their way?           '   ''                         1
Two circumstances were ii their favor. The first one,'i;
was that the pioneers of the new rush'" who had gone be-;,i,
fore them had found the pass and cleared the way; the sc- : i :
ond was, that this way was much less formidable to foot i
passengers, as they were, than to horsemen or'draymen.  'ii
Their, prilous path was sometimes through an almost:  f
impenetrable thicket up the nearly perpendicular front oft:|B
the mountain, somnetimes diverging to the right or left oft' ,
this along  he::brinmk of sonie fearful ;chasm, sometimes.;i
down the descent of a deep ravine across the roaring torrentg: )
:that huriied over the rocks at its bottom, and up the oppo- il
site aScent, planting their ieet upon its projecting frag4;;
ments of rock and holding on to the branches of the stuntediel
cedars tp assist them in climbing, or toprevent them fror <'
falling down to be crushed to deah  at the foot.
What will not men encounter and endure in the pursuti:i
of gold?,
When darkness put a stop to ftheir further progress the i
sat down to rest near the, top of the mountain in the midst;
of the most savage wilderness that the eye of man or wilI
beast ever beheld.     .   ,                         'i!1
Terrific precipices towered over their heads; awful gorgegi ,
opened at their feet; thorny and stunted thickets bristled'
all around them.                 ,                   ,
They lighted a watch fire to keep off beasts or birds 4qi:,
prey, and then, all too tired to prepare supper, each mi:^
took a piece of bread and cheese in his hand and strdect;be:;!
himself upon his blanket to rest until day., ::
Too weary to sleep, some among the party were awiak,, ,l
and so they talked.
;' .- i,, j 



<pb n="219"/>
,i'       A TORTURED HEART                      19
- ...   e tdell upon the foot trail, but how, in the name of
,..:.i.i/ter, horse, oxen, and wagons could be got over this
.!::? in", IX cannot imagine !" said Mr. Valentine.'
,<"y Oanother route, of course; and then the old miners
.:I<',teamsters here have devices of which people in civilized
;^ tie; , tes can form no idea. They are bound to reach a new
;!i' ( [dfield, and they will reach it," answered Mr. Duplicate,
:,': '^i'had been in this region before.
i.;.'i,'.:^,  ffiould think such a mountain as this would present an
;f ' ,;'passable barrier." 
i     N}.:4t:ot a bit of it! Wherever man can go the Australian:
:i::eamster will make his oen go, and take the dray behind
;:ilt!ean, when necessary. Why, they patiently stop for days
i' a;nd nights to fell trees andiclear a road before, them."
"'Bi,/: "But going up and down these steeps ?" 
i: "I'll tell you what -an old Australian told mie: .I eight 
; bullocks could not ascend the mountain with a oaded dray,
tenty-four bullocks, with  hal-loaded dray,  iht and
must.' "
"'Well, but in going down these steeps, which seems to
be difficult to impossibility, and dangerous to the extent of :
certain destruction ?"i inquired Mr. Valentine Hawke.[
"Yes, by the law of gravity, one would expect the loaded
dray above rather than behind the team to pitch down over
the bullocks' heads, and drag everything down to ruih. Bit:;  :
what does the ingniou driver do? :He fells a great tree
and hitches it, with all its bratches, on bhind tie dray, ant
lets it trail as a drag-,-the best sort of a'natural brakJe, you
know. 'Necessity is the mother of invention, you know.
I myself am filled with admiration at the inigeinity, the
hardihood and the indomitble perseverance of these men,
said Mr. Duplicate Hawke . 
"And I give it up and am going to sleep," relied Mr.
Valentine, turning over in his blanket and composing him-
self to rest.
This day, their first on the mountain, is only given as a
sample.
The second was like unto it, only a little worse.
The third brought them to the foot of the mountain;
but-
Into a pleasant valley, whose beauty, peace, and safety
should compensate them for all they had undergone?



<pb n="220"/>
220          A TORTURED HEART 
No, indeed! Having passed the mountain barrier, they-:,'
found themselves confronted by a rugged and sterile coun,- p
try, where ridge succeeded gully, and gully followed ridge, er1
for many weary miles. .
Here again they fell in with cavalcades of horsemen,. ?
trains of wagons, and processions of foot passengers, al l.
bound for the new gold fields.- 
This was certainly the greatest "rush" that had ever been '.
seen since the first discovery of gold in the great Bathhurst ,l
nugget.                                             ' .
All sorts and conditions of people that go to make up the I'
population of a great working city, came to swell this rush;:i'.
-men, women, boys, girls, babies, old and young, swarmed i;
through the wilderness toward the new E D]orado. 
These traveled in wagons, on horseback and afoot, in ;.
families, in parties, in pairs, or singly. 
Among these pilgrims to the shrine of gold were some :?
isolated travelers, who seemed to be strangely out of place ;
One was a sturdy, gray-haired, dark-skinned woman, pasisti
middle age. She rode on a mule, with panniers;each side ofX
her,.and seemed to be quite alone.
'Are you going to take up a claim and dig for gold*,
mother ?" inquired Mr. Duplicate Hawke, with jocular good :
humor, as he found himself by- the side of the solitary';
traveler.
'"Bless the man, no," she answered, quite seriously.;t 
"Though I do come of mining folk, being Corniwall born, . I3
shouldn't have tried that at my best days  No, lad! But!
a body must live, and I go to the diggings to make ten timo:<
as much by my hands there as I could anywhere else."  '
"But what can you do?" 
"Lad, do you mind there are about a-hundred single ma.li
here to one who has got a wife and family with him ?"' 
"That is easily seen."-          . 
"Well, then, why can't you see consequences as well al 'i.
objects? I come to cook, wash, iron, and mend for these : i.,
here poor bachelor bodies; and I allow to make more mo  ''
nor some of them will make by their gold digging."  *.'
"Shouldn't wonder. I never made anything by digging,  '
though I've seen fortunes dug up all around me."         l
"And lost, lad! See here, honey, I have been followinm g?: i
after new rushes ever since the first great rush after 's
:~~~~~~~~~~ ,% f I,; ,-, ;



<pb n="221"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    221
great Bathurst nugget was found-'cause, you see, it is only
on the new fields that I can make my profit. When all the
claims get pretty much settled, there's women enough to
take the work out'n my hands. The diggers send for their
wives, or go and fetch 'em, if they have any, and the bache-
lors go and get married. But in the new rushes the men
come mostly without their families, and stay without them
for months, and sometimes for years; so it is in the first
months I make my jack. But.I began to tell you, honey,
how fortunes are lost. The gold diggers mostly do make
fortunes; but the liquor sellers and the storekeepers mostly
get them. Now, you see that there man there!" she ex-
claimed, pointing to the other solitary traveler, who seemed
to be out of place in this moving crowd.
"I see him, a pale, puny fellow with a small bundle on
the end of a stick, and nothing in himself or his equipments
to indicate either the digger or the dealer. I wonder what
on earth he has come for? 
"To make lots of money, as he has been making ever since
the first rush. Like me, he takes after the new rushes."
"But what does he do ?"
"Sings and dances. He belonged to the 'Comique' at
Melbourne, but makes more money out of the diggers."
"By giving entertainments, at which he is manager, com-
pany, ticket taker and treasurer, I suppose?"
"Summat like that," said the woman, as she touched up
her mule, by way of hinting that the interview was at an
end.
Mr. Duplicate fell back among his own party.
This is only one of the many phases of the new rush.
As the vast and varied procession neared the new fields,
it was constantly augmented by wagons, horses, and foot
passengers pouring in by way of the rude bush tracks that
gave upon the main line of travel.
On the evening of the fourth day the van of the long
train, foremost among whom were our friends, Traverse,
Hawke, and Duplicate, declared, from all they had learned,
that another twenty-four hours of travel would bring them
to the new fields.
And with this pleasant prospect in view they kindled
their last watch fire, cooked their supper, and after eating



<pb n="222"/>
222          A TORTURED HEART                  . 
it, stretched themselves upon their blankets and "slept'"  ;i.
better "sleep" than i4 often enjoyed even by the "just." ' ,, -
"To-morrow evening, then, we may expect to be at te, :i
end of our labors," muttered Mr. Valentine lawke, as ! e :I)
turned, and rolled himself on his side.            ' '
"Of these sorts of labors, at least," murmured Duplicateo :4
as he dozed off into sleep.    :           a
"And if I bore myself with any other sort--"-- began: . i
Mr. Valentine Hawke, but the sentence was finished, in ri,
dream.       :.                              :       ,''
There was an early start the next morning.           I
By dawn of day the whole encampmient was up and tir-. ,
ring; by sunrise they were en route again, calling to each :.
other that before sundown they should reach the new fields. f
They were now cr~oing a rugged and sterile country cov*:: 
ered with quartz and scantily clothed with a thin and coarse :, l
grass :that found but little nutriment on that 'stony ground, .'!
and crossed by deep gullies, ithrough: which ran rapid :i
streams of. water, and by high ridges spiked wi  th a horny .
and stunted growth of Australian locust trees. 
:  But their journey was nearer to its end than their ,most :
sanguine hopes anticipated.            ..
About ten o'clock in the forenoon, Mr. Valenti neHawke ;:
and Mr. Duplicate, being a full eighth of a ntile in advance 'i
of ,their comrades,,: ascended a quartz riage, 'and looking ;
downI from its highest point, were struck with amazement I ;
Below them lay a scene,, a panorama of life, not to he 
found anywhere else in the world except in Australi a. :  i
They had come unawares upon the marvelous new gold .
fie14!' . 
Below them, at the bottom of a deep gully, for a mile or, ;
more up and down its banks, were gathered several thou- i
sand people of all nationalities, all ages and colors, and 7.'
both sexes.
There was also'a line of hastily constructed huts, tents, l.
cabins, some shops, some dwelling houses, and some taverns. /.,
Beside these there were tilted wagons, that served as temrn: i.j
porary shelter for the families who had come in them. And 
there were bullocks, mules, horses, and even cows, tethered .;:
' to posts or trees to keep them from straying into the bash.t . 
And there were innumerable shafts sunk, like wells, with :';'i
windlasses above them and two or more men around them..
4a..
'4 , 



<pb n="223"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      223
And down in the depths of the gully, upon the margin of
the stream on both sides, were men with tin pans, engaged
in gold washing.
Near the strangely constructed habitations there were
women and girls engaged in the open air, washing, hanging
out clothes, or sewing and minding babies.
Our travelers took in this scene in one astonished glance,
and then, congratulating themselves at the unexpected ter-
mination of their journey, they began to go down the ridge.
"What does it look like to you ?" inquired Valentine of
Duplicate Iawke.
"Well, I have been pretty much all over the world, and
I never saw anything just like that before. It makes me
think of an entire army bivouacking, or an American camp
meeting on a grand scale; and yet it is totally unlike either
of these scenes," answered the latter.
They rapidly descended the ridge, and making their way
cautiously among slunken shafts, tilted carts, and tethered
beasts, with a short nod given and returned by the men
they passed, entered upon the main street of the mushroom
city-if street it could be called where a couple of miles of
tents, and canvas huts, and wooden shanties flanked each
bank of the great gully, with the rushing stream at its
bottom.
They were received with curt nods by the men they met,
but they passed directly to a large canvas house with the
sign "Hotel" conspicuously painted on the front of it, and
the-P within the canvased walls, with the "bar" on one side,
and seats on two, they sat down to await the coming up of
their friends.
"What do you think of this sort of life, Val?" inquired
Mr. Duplicate Hawke.
"It is amazing! But I do think a week of it will be
enough for me. I came to satisfy my curiosity. Then I
shall leave you, Dupe. I must see Australia in all its won-
derful phases. I must visit .its vast sheep runs, its wealthy
cattle stations, its other gold diggings, its bush, its 'blacks,'
and even its convict penal settlements," replied Mr. Val-
entine Hawke.
"To do that last, mate, you will have to go to Van Die-
man's Land, where you will see the system in all its perfec-
tion," said the bartender, putting in his word uncalled for.



<pb n="224"/>
224          A TORTURED HEART
"And I shall do so, after I have been over Australia,"
good-humoredly replied Mr. Valentine Hawke.
A few minutes later the laggards of the party joined  .
them, and they left the tavern and went out to investigate : .
the fields.
Almost the first party they stumbled upon were he 
Joneses, who were gathered around their tilted wagons and 
tethered bullocks. 
Greetings were exchanged and our party passed on. 
Their investigation proved abundantly satisfactory.   A
George Traverse and Duplicate Hawke entered into part-  i
nership and staked out a good "claim," and secured it by 
the gold digger's simple title deed-which, however, all re- 
spected-a pickax stuck into the middle of the space thus 
marked out.
Of the five remaining men of Traverse's gang, three took 
a large claim as partners and two a smaller one.      :
Mr. Valentine Hawke declined to try his "luck" in such  i
ventures. He remained, however, with the gold diggers for -  .
two weeks, and at the end of that time availed himself of- i
a carrier's dray that was about to leave the diggings for the '
city to return to Melbourne.          " 
Before. his departure he put a sum of money amounting : 
to about fortyfive pounds, in the hands of Mr. Duplicate, 
and even forced it upon his acceptance, saying: -     "
"You have a right to that much, and much more than 
that, in compensation for all the damage you have suffereed 
through mv whim. You must write to me if you should ..
ever want a friend or a bank note.. Here is the address of
my bankers at Melbourne. Send your letters there and 
they will be forwarded to me, wherever I may be; but please :
remember to direct your letters to Hamilton Gower,_ by 
which name I am known to them, and not to Valentine 
Hawke, which name I prefer to leave behind me in the 
gold fields."                                         .
"All right! I will remember. I hope we may meet 
again before long," said Mr. Duplicate.              . : 
"We must meet, if Heaven wills, at Hawke Hall on the
twenty-first anniversary of my birth," replied Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower, as he once more shook hands with Mr. Dupli- ;.
cate Hawke, and went and jumped into the carrier's cart 
that was waiting for him at a little distance. 
.             .       .               ~~~~~~~~.?



<pb n="225"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      225
And so he left the gold fields to pursue his travels
through the wonderful new world of Australia.
The next time we shall meet him will be in the wilds of
Van Dieman's Land, and under very startling circum-
stances.
CHAPTER XXIV
FOREGATHERED WIf TE DE'IL 1'
THE excitement of Hobart Town over the escape of the
most notorious desperado in all the convict penal settle-
ments had not abated in the least degree, even when a
month had passed since that event.
That little city of the Antipodes, you see, is not like
London or New York, where a new sensation of to-day
makes us forget that of yesterday.
And, besides, this escape of an atrocious criminal was
alarming in its way, as the outbreak of a furious wild
beast would have been which was known to be roaming at
large through the woods around the town.
No woman or child dared to venture out into the coun-
try for fear of encourtering this unchained demon.
It was about five weeks since the escape of Jack Hice,
when, near the close of a scorching January day (I beg my
readers to remember that January weather in Hobart
Town corresponds to July weather in New York), a horse-
man was winding his way through the wilderness of woods
that surrounded the base of Mt. Wellington.
This solitary traveler was no other than Mr. Hamilton
Gower, as he chose to call himself.
This rather eccentric young gentleman had passed his
time, since we saw him last, in traveling over the Austra-
lian continent-as so large an island should be called-in
his own way.
On foot, or on horseback, in the carriers' drays, or in
the bullock drivers' wagons, he had visited every part of
that vast and interesting domain, and had seen all its
various and strongly contrasted phases of life.
He had made himself acquainted with the young cities
and new enterprises of South Australia, Victoria, Queens-



<pb n="226"/>
226           A TORTURED HEART                          .
land and New South Wales; he had penetrated into the. 
interior of all these colonies, had been the guest of the ,":'
hospitable squatters and of the lonely shepherds, had go.ne:';
over vast cattle stations and sheep runs, had "roughed it?: FI
among the gold diggers, both along the beds of rivers and' :'.;:
in the, ravines of quartz mountains; he had lost himselfi' 
in the "bush," had lost his money and almost his life among ':i
the bushrangers, had been succored by the native blacks--''0i
in short, he had passed through adventures enough to fill!'
a large volume; hut as these have nothing to do with ouir 7,
story we only allude to them here.
And now he had come to Van Dieman's Land, to inves-.',
tigate the only form of life in this region with which he :,
was unacquainted-the life of the convicts in the penal ;l
settlement. -He had seen Macquarrie Harbor, Sarah Isl-.?
and, Tasman's Peninsula. He had breakfasted and din2ied.i
as well as "supped full of horrors" amid these earthly'li
hells. 
And, at length, he was making his way on horseback,:i
across the country toward Hobart Town, intending to takel; 
passage on the first steamer that should stop at that por':'
on its voyage from Melbourne to London.             : 
He was well armed. . His experience with the bushien
had taught him:to take that much precaution in traveling;
through the wilderness. i
The sun was very low. He knew that, although he could '
not see: it through' the thickness of the foliage that surr:i
rounded him.                           - 
He stopped his horse for a few moments while he took a gi
map and a pocket compass from the breast of his coat and).
began to examine them to ascertain, if possible, hs is -|
tance from Hobart Town, and the chances of ehis     ng,
his destination before dusk.  ' 
While he was thus engaged the deep silence of the soli
tary desert was broken by piercing shrieks that rangly
through the forest, startling every living creature in it)I
The traveler's horse sprang, and was with difficulty coW ;1'
trolled, while the shrieks were followed by the agonize ,
cries of a woman.  -
"Help! Help! Help! Father! Jonas!"          '    .
The stalwart traveler threw himself from his reaitiig ;
horse, snatched his pistol from his breast pocket, cocked it:, 
.; , l^4S



<pb n="227"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    27
and plunged into the thicket from which the cries had
come.
Breaking through the brushwood he strode rapidly on.
The cries had ceased or been smothered, but a few yards
onward he came upon a shocking scene.
A young and beautiful girl was struggling vainly with
all her fragile strength to escape from the arms of a hid-
eous monster who held her in a firm grip with his right
arm, while he stopped her cries by covering her mouth with
his left hand.
Perhaps an older man might have called out:
"Release that lady or I will fire !" and thus given the
ruffian a chance for his life.
Our traveler was young, heroic and impetuous, and at
the sight of an outrage that filled his soul with rage, dis-
gust and horror, he fired impulsively, and brought the
demon down before the wretch could cry for mercy.
The traveler sprang to the spot where the wounded ruf-
fian lay rolling and howling with pain and rage, and tear-
ing up the brushwood and earth with his nails and teeth,
and where the beautiful, pale girl sat with disordered dress
and disheveled hair, dazed and bewildered, trembling and
fainting, scarcely comprehending the nature of her danger,
or the fact of her deliverance.
Even at that moment of intense excitement Mr. Hamil-
ton Gower perceived that the lady whom he had rescued
was one of the most beautiful beings that the eye of man
had ever beheld; with features cast in the purest Grecian
mold; with a complexion fair and transparent as the petals
of the white japonica; with large, soft, dark eyes, fringed
with long, dark lashes, and arched by dark eyebrows; and
with a perfect head, covered with an abundance of splen-
did, golden-hued hair, that fell over her lovely shoulders
and white dress like a glittering yellow veil.
Mr. Hamilton Gower bent over her, saying in a low but
reassuring voice:
'Do not be frightened. The danger is over. You are
quite safe. Quite safe, believe me!"
"Oh! thank you! How can I thank you enough?" fal-
tered the young lady, in a very faint voice.
The terrible howling of the wounded fiend, who rolled



<pb n="228"/>
S28       : A TORTURED        HEART          : ;
and cursed and tore up the ground a few feet from thLew,::
almost prevented conversation.                      ' 
"Will you permit me to guard you to your homi ot
friends? Are you able to walk? .Where shall I t
you?" inquired the traveler, bending to the young lady!,
ear, and speaking very distinctly, that she might catch i  ,'i
words amid the uproar.  - 
"Oh! I do so much thank yout   And my fathAer-4 'wie
thank you! Do you-do'you not think that poor soul is'
suffering very much, sir? Is there nothing we can do t:o?
relieve him?" inquired the young. lady, ina voice sofen94:
by compassion.             , '    ,.   .
'Humph:! Do angels pity demns in their torments, I;.
woender!' The, wretch"'suffers-deservedly. But I must'i
take you to your'home or ht your feriand, yosng lady.: s  ;s
'possiblt'e that you have a home in thi wilerness, or are
you out 'With a paty of excrsionsts, from whom yot have'
been 'eparated,'.,"    ."              ,      : 1'..  s
: I have a home on the montai. I wll show: y ou.th
path, and thaik you' very sma  for tking me ther;e an:i
so will my father, I am sur.  3t;can we not do som:;
thing for that poor:man before we go T" inuired the yoigf
.lady rising, and walking toa ":her  lasis ant.  ':
" Come away "I. exclaimed the youg ma, in a oic mor 
pereptory tn polite, as h   tepped afte'her h  -nd took'
her armiaind turned:her around.       : ' .
"But why? What harm c     n comie of my 0going to lfm "
.te is suffering, he is disabled, anI h my be dying 1
would not -hurt a fly now ! :he answered;  a tone of pt'Et
"You can do him no good, young lady. Show 'me the: ?
path to your father's house, and I wili guard you safely'i
there," said Mr. HEamilton Glower. 
"Come along      , then, sir   do' thank you, and so wil':.^
papa! And we can send men and a stretcher to have this :
poor wounded man brought up to the Hermitage and takeni,:;
care of" replied the young gil, leading the way out of the>:;
thicket. 
'Do you know whom you are wasting your compassion.
upon?" inquired the traveler.. 
"I know he is a poor soul, suffering the most horrible;
agonies of mind and body. Oh, sirl" she suddenly broke' i
off and exclaimed: "Do not, I beg you, think me ungrate,;,
:, V,



<pb n="229"/>
A TORTURED HEART                . 29
ful to you for saving me! I am, indeed, most grateful!
I know you were compelled to shoot that man in order to
save me, and I thank you deeply for doing it; yet I cannot
help being sorry for the forlorn wretch," she added, look-
ing over her shoulder at the fallen ruffian, who was still
rolling and howling and gnashing his teeth.
"I inquired, young lady, if. you knew who that man is,"
said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"No, indeed; of course I do not," she replied.
"He is an escaped convict of the worst class, as I know
by his yellow uniform and the word 'Felon' stamped upon
the back, with 444A," said Mr, Hamilton Gower.
"I cannot blame them for trying to regain their liberty,"
replied the young lady.
"Perhaps you cannot blame him for his assault upon an
unprotected woman," retorted Mr. Hamilton Gower, who
inwardly resented' her sympathy with the wounded ruf-
fian.
"Oh, yes, indeed I do! Pray do not misunderstand me,
sir. I am not defending the man. I am only pitying him.
And surely we may pity the worst of sinners! Ayy and
pity them the most" she said, as she continued to lead the
way through the pathless woods.
He shrugged his shoulders and followed her in silence,
until their way, though still through the thicket, began to
ascend.          - 
"We are going up the mountain, I think, though I can-
not see a yard before me through the trees," said the trav-
eler at length. 
"Yes, we are going up the mountain. My father's house
is on the table-land, about halfway to the top."
"Then it must be about two thousand feet above the
level!" exclaimed Mr. Hamilton Gower, as he followed her
through an invisible path so narrow as to oblige them to
walk in single file.
"No, not so much, and not more than half so much from
where we stand."
"But even at half the distance, what an eyrie perch for
a dwelling house !"
"It was my father's fancy, and I like it."
"Is it not difficult to hold communication with the rest
.4



<pb n="230"/>
230          A TORTURED HEART
of the world? But pardon me, my interest in the' subject  ,
had betrayed me into impertinence, I fear." 
"Not at all. I will tell you. Papa 'took up' that tabjle- '. i
land, and before he could have his house built he had ai:
road made, by which to haul what building materials he, ..i
needed to the site. He did not need to bring much, for :i
cedar, pine and all good timber, as well as rock, was to be: ,
found in abundance on the mountain. le had a sawmill ;.:Z
built first of all, And he had a turning lathe. All our, ^'
furniture and goods up by the same road when it was fin-;'^
ished. All the rough labor was performed by convicts hired' fi^
from the government."             .                : i
"Has your father many convicts in his employment?" 4
inquired the traveler. , 
The youinglady hesitated for a while, and thenslow ly,1I
and gravely replied:                                  i
'   Re has-one'         '              '      .. 
"A 'good conduct? felon, I presume ?              . '
"I-  hope so," she murmured, in the same tone.-      4
Mr. Hamilton Gower, perceiving that his questions were, :
for some reason or other, mal apropos, relapsed into silen,.::
As they ascended the mountain the woods became thin 'il
ner and the trees more stunted in growth.       .:
"This,road of which you spoke, is it on this side?" at A
length inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower. 
"Yes, and at some points quite neat to us; but it is a. i:
serpentine road, as you may judge it would have to be. on
the side of so steep a mountain, and for the use of. horses 'i
and ox teams. I' never go by it. .I can always find romy;
way through-the woods." 
"And do you often extend your walks as far from yowur: i
house as you have done this evening-at your peril ?"   i
"Oh, often, almost every day when the weather permits.:(!
Walking is one of my principal pastimes." 
"Is it not dangerous for you to tempt these wilds alone?' "'i
"No! In all the years that I have lived here and wan ::i:
dered in the woods below, I have never met a human being ::
until to-day when I met my assailant and my deliverern'
Oh, how providential your arrival was, sir !  It would al' ';
most seem as if my guardian angel, seeing that dangerous  '
man in my path, had sent you to save me I"



<pb n="231"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    231
"I should be very much indebted to your guardian angel
for the office !" said the young man, warmly.
"You are very kind to say so," answered the girl.
"But I hope you will not venture down in that wilderness
again without company or protection," he said, very se-
riously.
"Oh, no, for although I think there is only about one
chance in a million for such a misadventure to happen to
me again, yet I would not risk thai one," solemnly replied
the girl.
The sun had now set, but the glorious "afterglow" of
these Southern sunset skies still illumined the heavens and
the earth.
CHAPTER XXV,
THE MYSTIC MOUTATIN HOMEB
THEY now came in sight of a spacious, white mansion,
built in the midst of beautifully terraced and ornamented
grounds on the table-land above them./
A long flight of steps cut in the solid rock led them up
to the lowest terrace, which was carpeted with green grass
and shaded with trees, and traversed by flagstone walks
edged with continuous lines of rose bushes, and flanked
here and there by arbors and rustic seats.
Passing across this terrace by its sinuous walks they
came to a short flight of half a dozen stone steps leading
up to the second terrace, which was laid out in parterres
of flowers, bordered with hedges of box, between which
wound white gravel walks that shone like pebbles of pearl
in sands of silver.
Passing across this by the gleaming serpentine paths,
they ascended by another flight of marble steps to the third
terrace immediately in front of the house.
This terrace was the crowning glory of the grounds. It
was laid out in grass plots bordered with low hedges of
flowers and shrubs of the most exquisite beauty and de-
licious fragrance. In the center of each plot stood a group
of statuary, gleaming whitely from the green foliage of a
clump of trees; or else an elegant arbor, overgrown with
ill



<pb n="232"/>
232          A TORTRED ) EAT                  . 
creeping vines and climbig roses; or, finally, a tfotta . 
whose bright waters sang as they rose and fell, splaMsh:i !;gl
in their marble reservoir below. 
"What a charming place! An oasis in the desert! A '<
paradise in the midst of purgatory! This must have beeai i
the work of fairies !" exclaimed the youthful traveler, in ;:i<lt
burst of enthusiasm.                  ' 
"No, it was the work of convicts," said the young lady,'"i
very gravely, as she led the way up to the house. : 
It was an oblong building with a white marble front, antd!
many windows opening .upon piazzas that extended fromia 
end to end of evey story from baseent to mansard roo'. t'li
It stood against a near baekgrpund of cedar frees, ws:hpse:;,:
dark-green foliage threw out into radiant relief the gleam- ii
ing wite walls of the mansion.            : 
-The young lady led her companion up a flight of. broad;,:
marble steps to , long piazza, whose marble pillars were'ii
twined with running roses, and across that to a pair of:i >
double doors constrnuted of panels of beautifully contraste :>,i
woods, and standing abbot the miiddle f the length of thi;}B
house, and, having four French windowS on each side1. -: 
The young lady opened this door ind admitted her nis-il
tor intoi spacious hall whose flooraai in      gons of '
rare twoods, and whose wa            erUs ere  oreved with . ati*ta i
paintings in freseo.'                        -. : '
Bamboo chairs, and lounges, of luxunious ontructtiom:i,
for ease and coolness stood in convenint places: 'A spir'tl1
s staiitase,: trong as a tower of iron, yet liiht as the flighti%,
=of a sparrow, led' up to the stories abhove4,.,
n.  y doors of cedar wood opened oiaf Isides to the nti  |
merous suits of rooms...;                   . se,  t'. :
The whole was lighted by a s'tained' glass window in thjl
roof, which poured a flood of rosy radiance over the sceimikl.
There seemed to be no porter or footmamnin attendance ,
The young lady herself opened a door ,on the right,' andi
motioned her visitor to enter. 
He obeyed, her, and found himself in a spacious summer :?
room, which, by its furniture and appointments, mighti, ' *
have belonged to a house in China or Japan rather thai:n e: t :';
that of an English colonist in Tasmania. 
The walls were covered with Japanese silk, the floor witi i i
Chinese matting. The chairs and lounges were, of bainbo&'.
'  .



<pb n="233"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   233$
work, the tables and stands of Japanese inlaid woods; the
curtains at the windows were of Japanese silk; the orna-
ments on the mantelpiece and on the brackets and stands
were Chinese monsters and Japanese boxes.
And not only the room, but the sole occupant of the
room, attracted the attention of the stranger, who had an
abundant opportunity for observation, as will be seen.
The sole inmate was a noble-looking old man, with a
smooth, fair face, a beardless chin and long gray hair,
which parted in the middle above a fine forehead, fell in
long waves down over his shoulders.
He was wrapped around in a long, flowing dressing gown
of India silk, and he 'was reclining back in his bamboo
rocking chair, fast asleep.
"Ah! He is taking his afternoon nap! But it must be
nearly over now, for it is evening. Sit here, sir, if you
please, while I go and speak to him," said the young lady,
as she led her companion to a seat beside the window at a
distance from the one occupied by the old man. 
Mr. Hamilton Gower bowed and sat down.
The young lady went up to the old, man, bent over him
and pressed her lips to his brow.
This gentle salute awoke htim.
"Ah, my angel child! Is it you? Have you- returned?
But you are later than usual, my darling," he said, draw-
ing her down upon his lap and passing his arm around her
waist. 
"Yes, father, love; but I have had anr adventure," she
answered, looking in his kind, brown eyes with a smile
that was intended to allay any fears that her words might
have aroused.
"An adventure, Seraph! What adventure, my child?"
demanded the old man, with an uneasiness that might have
been anxiety but for the reassuring smile on his daughter's
lovely face.
"Yes, father, love. I met an escaped eonvict, and he-
was rude to me- "
"Seraph !" exclaimed the old man, growing paler than
his wont.
"But he did not hurt me, father, love! He only fright-
ened me-and-and-then, opportunely, providentially, a



<pb n="234"/>
234          A TORTURED HEART
gentleman traveler came np and brought me safe hotme 
Will you see him and thank him for me, father, love?".
"Seraph! This is a very strange story you are telingk.
me! How was the bushranger rude to you?"
"He frightened me, father, love, with his rough speechi/:
and manner."                                       ' 
"And who was the gentleman who brought you home ?" :
"I do not know, father, love 1-a very kind, brave man;-ie
He is here. Will you see him and thank him for mei:i
now?" 
"Yes, my darling! And learn from him more of thiis 
adventure than you seem able to tell me. Bring the gen-' .
tleman here, Seraph?                           ' 
"Will you come and see my father, sir?' inquired thli^
young lady, looking up and smiling upon the stranger, who:ll ?
from the other end of the room had heard every word of' 
this short conversation-.
Mr. Hamilton Gower came immediately, stood beforel
the old gentleman, and bowed.         "X
"My dear father, this is the gentleman who brought me' 
home. Sir, .this is my father, Mr. Theobald Elfinstar,"?i
said the young lady, persenting the stranger.-    S'
M   'Er. Hamilton Gower bowed deeply. :   ' "
"'I am happy to see you,'r y ddear sir, and to have tlis
opportunity of expressing my profound gratitude for th
service you have rendered my- daughter-a service mucWnt
greater, I know, than she, in her ignorance, even suspect
I beg you, sir, to tell me the name of one whom I shall r:i
member in my prayers to the latest hour of my life,: sailt
Mr. Elfinstar, with much emotion.   .
The stranger hesitated for a moment, and then in a reck;|
less, offhand manner, replied: 
"My name is Gower. Hamilton Gower; But indeed.
my dear sir, you vastly over-estimate the little service T
have been so happy as to render Miss Elfinstar-  ":i'
"Enough, my good young sir. It is graceful of you t ,:
express yourself as you do. But the fact remains the same,%4
You have saved my Seraph from death, or a fate worse i
than death. We are hermits here, and our society is not ;
very enlivening,; but I hope, as you are a traveler, that if,::
your business elsewhere is not very urgent, you will honor -a
us with your company here as long as you can endure ou  :
*  ~~ '    X   7



<pb n="235"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    25s
dullness. We will do all we can to make it less dull for
you."
"You are very good. I thank you very much. For to-
night, at least, I shall be happy to avail myself of your hos-
pitality," replied the traveler, with a bow.
"It is settled, then; nor shall we let you depart in the
morning, or next day, or next week, without an effort to
detain you," said Mr. Theobald Elfinstar, with a genial
smile, as he touched a bell-pull in the chimney corner.
A young servant man, out of livery, answered the sum-
mons.
"Tell Jones to saddle a good horse and come around here
for orders," said the host. 
, The boy bowed and departed.    :
"And now, my young friend, tell me where I can send
for your luggage," said Mr. Elfinstar. 
The visitor laughed.
"My luggage consists of a pair of saddlebags across the
back of my 'good gray steed,' and where he is it Would be
very hard to tell. I Ieft him tearing and plunging in the
blind path when I threw myself out of my saddle and
rushed into the thicket at the cry of this young lady.'
Mr. Elfinstar looked from the speaker to his daughter in
great distress.. 
"'Don't worry yourself, father, love. I told you :the man
frightened me, but he did not hurt me, really;" said
Seraph, with a smile.
"Your horse, I fear, is lost, sir; but I will send a groom
in search of him. Seraph, my child, where did this mis-
adventure occur "
"In the Iron Oak Dell, by the Fairy's Spring," answered
the young lady. 
('I will give orders for the place to be searched for the
horse and saddlebags. In the meantime, sir, my stables
and my wardrobe, as well as my house, are most heartily
at your service," said the old gentleman.
The guest bowed his acknowledgments.
"And, father, love, while you are sending, I wish you
would send a stretcher down by four men to bring that
poor soul up to the house, so that he may be properly at-
tended to," said the young lady.



<pb n="236"/>
236          A TORTURED HEART 
"What poor soul, Saraph? What are you talking aboai
my child?" inquired the old gentleman.            '4
"That poor man who frightened me, father, love. He:
wounded and lying on the bare ground, alone and unaid
He may die for want of help if he is not brought here
quickly as possible.. `;
Mr. Elfinstar looked from his daughter to his visitor
alarm.
"I was obliged to shoot the ruffian, There was no ti
for a parley,'' said-the trlYver.' .   ' 
'Ah    I suspect. there was deeper deviltry in this af
than I have been told," said M:r.. Elflnsta, r. ',  ,
"Indeed, no, there i not, dear faher.. I am -not in ti
least hurt. There is not: a bruise r a scratch about m
said Seraph, with'ah .'                        . s '
"'I know tihat you are not hurt,; my precious  The fa4
of ': y' living to say so shld prove to you that I kw  y
, arite safe. If harm ho shoud cone t you toiwj  Se ap
d'eath lwould come to, me ."
"An:d since I am iuhurt;yon will send for t:at po p
wounded man to be brought 'here ,ad nursed ? inquir~
tihe young' lady.1'               ' '
'  Yes, I will 'secnd for him." .           :   y:
"'Im ediately, father, love! Consider, he  as aire
lain on the ground more than' two hours.'"    : 
'My ;.' love, wotded iieroes have tain on the battle
days and nights before they could be found and earried oi
and yet they have recovered and got well. Bt: I wil se
for this disabled rascal and afer I havegot him here 
will notify the authorities.' 
,Father, love t
'It will be my most imperative duty to do so,. Seraph.
have no doubt that this demon is no other than the notoi
ious criminal, Jack Hice, of whose escape from the cha
gang Jonas brought us word from the town." 
Whatever the merciful spirit of the girl might ha
prompted her to reply, was arrested on her lips by a: ri
at the door. 
A long, lean, sallow, hollow-cheeked and high-nosed m
whose large ears stuck out from his head like the hanl
of a jar, and whose thin, red hair hung straggling do 
,  4,,ti



<pb n="237"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    237-
over his gray coat collar, entered the room with a low bow,
and said:
"If you please, sir, I have saddled Pennywhistle and
come for orders."
"Very well; but there must be some little change in the
intended program. Your business is to go down to the
Iron Oak Thicket and search for a saddled horse with a
pair of saddlebags, and to bring them to this place. But
before you leave the premises, return to the stables and take
a cot-I suppose one of the grooms can lend you one for
the occasion-and select four of the strongest men and
instruct them to carry that cot down by the road to the
Iron Oak Thicket, and then go through to the Fairy Spring
Dell and pick up a wounded man whom they will find
there, and lay him.on the cot and bear him.here. Do you
understand ?"
"Yes, sir."
"And, Jonas, tell them to bear him slowly and carefully,
because he is in great pain," added the young lady.
"Yes, miss."
A pause.
"Any more orders, sir ?
"Not any."
"Any more orders, miss ?"
"No, Jonas."
"Go on with you! The horse may be lost and the man
dead before you move!" exclaimed his master.
Jonas bowed to the ground and departed.
"Stay! Come back here !" called Mr. Elfinstar.
"There! I knew there was to be more orders l There
always is. I, all the time, have to turn back, and it is un-
lucky to turn back !" grumbled the man, half audibly, as
he returned to the room.
"On your way out send Sammy here," said the old gen-
tleman.
"Yes, sir; any more orders, sir '"
"No."
"Sure, sir?"
"I have no more orders, you blockhead! Go !"
Jonas bowed again and withdrew.
His exit was followed soon by the entrance of the boy
who had first answered the bell.



<pb n="238"/>
S28          A TORTURED HEART
"I want your attendance, Sammy. Follow me and this,;|
gentleman. Come, Mr. Gower, I will show you your room. "
. And the old gentleman arose and left the parlor, !  it
lowed by his guest and his servant..                ;'
He led his guest to a pleasant bedchamber immediatei ^|
over the parlor they had left, and whose two windows cpmiB|0
manded a view of the front terraces, the declivity of thB^C
mountain, the wooded valley below, through the midst. o,)
which wound the Derwent River, and of the range of imoi&X
tains whose summit were lost in the clouds of the distai~ti
horizon.
The windows were shaded with white linen, blinds: a
draped with white muslin; the floor covered with matt.-i.l
and the walls simply whitewashed. The bedroom set 'oj;
furniture was of white enameled wood, and the bed it
was covered with a white countrpane.    -          ' ::
Pure, clean and cool was the aspect of the place, suggest'%
ing the bower of a young girl; yet the host said to hisit
guc4t: 
'This is my bedroom, sir. I have brought you here ftr'
because----" 
He paused and went to a bureau and drew out a drawei
leaving it open; .thence to a wardrobe and unlocked t:"'
doors, leaving them open, and finally to a door leading t
a bathroom and dressing room, leaving it open.     . i  B
"ecause," he resumed, "there is everything requisite'
your toilet. I beg you will aceept all, as frnkly and a'si'ns
ply as it is offered."  '     ' . ' 
: I 'thank you. You are very kind," replied Mr. Iatniib
Gower, with a bow.                    ' .        1'.
"The boy here will wait on you and answer your 'el}4'
while you give us the happiness of your company. Snppit
will be ready at eight-not dinner. We keep old-fashioinS
hours at the Hermitage-breakfasting at eight, dining s
two and supping at eight," added the old gentleman, as'fi
left.
"'Old-fashioned hours,' quotha! Why, they are. ::lei'
torical hours-antediluvian hours !" laughed Mr. Hamilton:
Gower, as he proceeded, with the help of "the boy," to sthei'^
off his coat, vest, etc. 
However, the young traveler need not have been eititi(;;
, .,



<pb n="239"/>
A TORTURED HEART                       239
for he had known no more fashionable hours since his ar-
rival in the Australian colonies.
After the first good bath he had enjoyed for many days
the young gentleman encased himself in a full suit of his
host's clothes, which, if they were not a perfect fit in all
respects, did very well in an emergency.
Then he went downstairs, attended by     his boy, who
opened a door on the left side of the hall and admitted him
int, a long drawing-room, which impressed him at first
sight as a vista of moonlight on snow.
In fact, the room was upholstered entirely in white and
silver; the walls covered with white paper lighted up by
silver stars; the windows draped with white muslin, sup-
ported by silver cornices; the floor covered by a Chinese
cloth of white ground with silver flowers; the sofas and
chairs of silver-plated frames were covered with white, sil-
ver-flowered silk; the tables and stands of white marble
were supported on silverwplated pedestals; the mirrors were
framed in silver-plated frames; the statuettes that stood
on the marble stands or brackets were also of marble. The
only bits of color in the room were from the fragrant flow-
ers that filled the alabaster vases, or from the richly
mounted, illustrated volumes that lay on the marble tables.
This was evidently the summer drawing-room of this
comfortably arranged house.
There was no one in the room.
Mr. Gower, in his fresh toilet, his spotless white linen
coat and pantaloons, felt quite in harmony with his sur-
roundings.
He went to one of the vases, took a crimson moss rose-
bud from among its flowers and set it in his buttonhole.
Then he went to the book table and picked up "Thomp-
son's Seasons," bound in crimson and gold and beautifully
illustrated.
While he was looking over its pages, and just as his eyes
had lighted on the lines,
"Come, gentle spring, ethereal mildness, come!"
the door opened, and Spring herself, embodied in the form
of his young hostess, entered the room.
Rie stepped forward to meet her, and as he took her hand



<pb n="240"/>
240           A TORTURED HEART 
to lead. her to a seat he thought he never had seen so fair 
a vision. We have before described her classic features  ,
her fair, transparent, blooming complexion, her large, soft,: i.;.:
pathetic,':dark eyes, shaded by their long lashes and arched' '1
by their dark eyebrows, and her wealth of yellow, golden:' ,?:-2-
hair, which was now carried back from her sweet, low fore-. ;;;
head by a bandeau of pearls and flowed in rippling wave- !ii
lets down over her shoulders. She wore a trained dress otf 
white silk, embroidered down the front, around'the borders.
and on the edges of her short sleeves and low neck. String 'a;
of pearls adorned her lovely bare arms and bosom. An4r :'&
she wore white kid gloves like a London belle.        ;'
"I hope you will not find it very dull here, Mr. Gower,.
she said.                                           . ".
"Dull !" he repeated, in a tone and with a look that he:.:
could not control, although it was early in the day of their ii
acquaintance to betray the deep interest he was already be- ;e l
ginning to take in this fair and gentle creature.
She seated herself on the sofa to which he had led her, i
and, with a gesture as simple as a child's, signed for him ie'
to sit beside her.
"We live within ourselves-too much within ourselves- *i
and, while we rejoice in the presence of a visitor, we know!.
that you must find life very monotonous at the Hermitage, ':
she added.  :      
The entrance of his host interrupted the: tete-a-tste, .'?i
Mr. Elfinstar politely hoped that his guest felt rested aniiul
refreshed, and was reassured by the latter upon that pointi
Then a servant appeared at the-door and announpe|
supper.
"Come, sir," said the old gentleman, rising. 
Mr. Gower arose, and, with a courtly grace never learnedi,;
in the wilds of Tasmania, offered his arm to Miss Elfinstair
and led the way from the room.                         ' '
A dainty and well-served repast awaited them in the cool::i
and fragrant dining-room. In addition to the more suJ:;i
stantial fare, there was a great variety of the most delicious":' '
tropical fnit, fresh and preserved. 
To the gratification of his host, the traveler made an '.'
excellent supper.
Half an hour later, when they were all seated on the ,' 
front piazza, enjoying the delicious coolness and fragrance  ,
 :  ,q,3



<pb n="241"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   241
of the summer moonlit night, and viewing from their com-
manding height the magnificent face of the mountain and
dip of the valley, a man came up to the steps and stood and
bowed.
In his Tall, lank form Mr. Hamilton Gower recognized
Jonas Stackpole.
"'Well ?" inquired Mr. Elfinstar.
"Well, sir, I have got the brute and the saddlebags, and
a chase I had ! But the animal had tired himself out with
his capers and was willing enough to let me lead him home.
Saddlebags and beast both in the stable, sir," the man ex-
plained.
"Quite right; but you must bring the saddlebags around
to the house."
"Yes, sir."
"And what of the wounded man, Jonas?" inquired the
young lady.
"They found him just where the master said, miss, by
the Fairy Spring. I went along with them and helped to
lift him up and lay him on the cot, and they are a-bringing
him along by the road."
"He is still living, then?"
"I should just think he is, miss. He was quiet when we
first reached the ground, but when I stooped down to look
at him and asked him how he felt himself, he began to cuss
up and down and through and through enough to make
my hair stand up straight on my head. I wouldn't go a-
nigh him, if I was you, miss. His langgurwage ain't fit
for no lady to hear," added the man.
"Was he suffering much ?" inquired Seraph.
"No more than he deserves, miss. -I'd bet my pile on
that, if I had a pile to bet. He was thusty, miss; and
after cussin' of me uphill and down dale, in langgurwage
of the wust sort, he ordered of me to bring him a drink of
water, which I went and dipped my hat full and give it to
him-for the good Lord's sake, not for hizzen, you may be
sure," added the man.
"There, that is enough, Jonas. Go and bring the sad-
dlebags to the house," said his master.
"Yes, sir. Any more orders?"
"No."
"Sure there's none?"



<pb n="242"/>
42        A TORTURED HEART
"I am quite sure. Be off I T 
The groom went his way, and was not on this occasioai.
recalled again.
As the man disappeared along the path leading to th&;
stables, a procession appeared coming up the avenue--foTr 
men carrying a cot by the four corners, and upon the cot a'
fifth man, stretched out asif he were dead. He was cer-
tainly quiet enough now.      .               ' 
Miss Elfinstar impulsively started to go and meet the;
procession. 
"Come back, Seraph. Go .into the house. Ths is no
place for you,"' said her'father. : 
The girl immediately obeyed. 
"Go wth her, Mr. Gower. I will attend to this matter,
continued the old gentleman.  : .        : 
I hope you will call mei, s ir f  I can: be of the l
service, :said the gut.           . 1           .l
'"I thank yous yes, certainly.i   1              ;:
Mr. Hamilton Gower willingly followed the young ladt:
.whom he found in the summerdrawing-room, standing 
one of the front windows,; looking out 
"Your' father sent me after you,'; he said, wi  a am
as he took his place at her side, "and I only wish that 4
the commands that shall .ever e laid on me during t
-whole course d my future life may be as ageeable as
.i"   ":'/^ins'thai  *  11.1';1 .a:i :do.'  .        b.a
"Is this miserable man dea, d do you think ?' "le 
very still," said the, young girl, quite unaffectedly igno
the young gentleians ciompliment. .,
"I really cannot tell you; but 't he should be dead,
should it concern you, my dear Miss Elinstar ?" inqa
Hamilton Gower, with just a shade of annoyance .in,:
tone.
- I do not know," she answered, humbly; tunt I hope
may get well to lead a better life before he leaves
world," she added. 
Then they both fell into silence, for they heard the s
noise made by the men in lifting the cot with the w
man upon it up the eteps onto the piazza, and throu  
front door.                                   ' 
"Bring- him into this back room, and set him doa w l
It would give him too much pain to attempt toi e
.;: 
': '3a'1



<pb n="243"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    243
up these stairs," said the voice of Mr. Elfinstar, as they
bore the cot through the hall toward the rear of the house.
"He is not dead, then. I am so glad! He may live to
recover," said Seraph.
"To what purpose, my dear young lady?" gravely in-
quired Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"To redeem his past-to live a better life," replied
Seraph.
"To break into a few more houses; to rob a few more
banks; to cut a few more throats, and finally die on a
scaffold instead of on a cot," amended Mr. Gower.
Seraph covered her face with her hands, and bowed her
head upon her breast.
The young gentleman regarded her in silence and sorrow
for a few minutes, and then said:
"I have offended you. I am a sad ruffian, I am afraid;
but I have been traveling for the past year among a rough
set of men. I beg your pardon, Miss Elfinstar."
"You have not offended me in the least," she answered,
dropping her hands and raising her head; "but what you
have been saying is so horrible !" she added, with a shudder.
"I know it. You had just as well have been exposed to
the blasphemies of our friend on the cot as to my enter-
taining conversation," he answered, in a self-accusing tone.
What further might have been said was prevented by the
appearance of Mr. Elfinstar, whok came in and said:
"I think the man will die, though not immediately. I
have sent a groom on a fresh horse to Hobart Town to fetch
a surgeon, though I do not suppose that one can possibly
get here before the morning. Do not look so distressed,
my Seraph! Death is the best possible thing that could
happen to the poor wretch at this time. Come, sir.' Will
you come in and see him ?" inquired the old gentleman.
Mr. Hamilton Gower turned with a bow to accompany
his host.
They passed out of the drawing-room and down the hall
to a back parlor plainly furnished, with straw matting on
the floor, linen shades at the windows, and cane chairs and
sofas.
In the middle of the room stood the cot upon which was
stretched the dying man, his head upon a clean pillow, his
form covered by a white counterpane. His face had been



<pb n="244"/>
544          A TORTURED HEART 
washed and his hair combed, and his wretched convict suit';i
exchanged for a clean set of underclothes. He was lying i
quite still, with his eyes closed and his bloodless face look; 'j
ing ghastly white in contrast to his jet-black hair, eyebrowsl
and short beard of about five weeks' growth.        '4i
The two gentlemen stood gazing silently upon him.  I
The light of a hanging lamp fell full upon the scene. 
Hamilton Gower, who had not seen the face of the mana-i:
distinctly at the time he shot him, in the thicket, now gazedl :^
upon him with a changing color and sickening heart. .
Not because the wretch was then dying of a wound in- i
flicted by his own hand, though that circumstance affected t
him more deeply than he would have confessed, even to.ld
himself, 
"I have given him forty drops of laudanum in two ounceels
of brandy, and the treatment has somewhat lulled his pain'i
and revived his fainting strength," said Mr. Elfinstar. 
At the sound of voices, the dying man slowly lifted hisa;
heavy lids and fixed a pair of large, black eyes full uponi':
the face of the younger man, who now started violently, ex4
claiming: -       . .                               : ' I
"Ham Gowl Heaven of heavensI Ham Gow !"           ti
CHAPTER XXVI
a DEATIBED REVELATION 
"HAM Gow! Is it possible that I find you in this cod 
dition?" demanded Mr. Gower, in a tone of great mentaiL
distress, as he bent over the wounded man, who just staret^?i
stupidly for an instant and then, with a sigh, closed ilnS
eyes.
"You know this man, then, sir?" inquired Mr. Elfinstari
in some surprise.-                                 .:i
"Yes, I recognize him now as a man I have known from '
boyhood in the old country, and for a short time in thei  ':
colonies also," gravely and sadly replied Mr. (Gower. '  .
"And I judge from your words and manner that you i'':
have just recognized him-that you did not know him' when .'i
you shot him?"                                      .
* d)-
'?.e 



<pb n="245"/>
A TORTURED HEART                      245
"No, I did not. And now I feel deeply grieved to have
found him in this manner."
While his guest was speaking, Mr. Elfinstar looked in-
tently on his face and then on that of the man on the bed.
"You are enough like one another to be brothers," he
said, at length.
"The likeness has been often noticed in our native coun-
try," replied Mr. Gower.
"Enough alike to be brothers," repeated the old gentle-
man. "I beg your pardon, sir, but there are brothers and
brothers," he added.
"Is this man sleeping or comatose?" inquired Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower.
"He is under the influence of the opium I have given
him. I must sit up with him to-night to watch its further
effects. I hope the doctor will arrive early to-morrow
morning," said Mr. Elfinstar.
"Is it necessary that he should be watched to-night ?" in-
quired the guest.
"Can you ask, young sir?    Of course it is absolutely
nec'ssary."
"I did not know. I have had no experience in these
rmatters. But since you say it is so, I will sit up with
1.im myself, Mr. Elfinstar."
"But, my dear young friend, I cannot permit you to do
anything of the sort. You are just off a long journey.
You require rest. You must go to bed and sleep."
"I beg your pardon, Mr. Elfinstar. I cannot go to bed.
I cannot sleep. I shall not leave this room. Here lies the
poor companion of my boyhood, slain by my own hand, dy-
ing before my own eyes. Say that he was justly sacrificed,
that he was a felon, who met his fate while attempting to
commit another crime; yet the facts remain the same. He
was the playmate of my boyhood, and he has fallen, how-
ever justly, necessarily, inevitably-he has fallen by my
hand, and I must not and will not desert his deathbed!"
"Oh, if you look at it in that light I have nothing more
to say."
"Understand me, Mr. Elfinstar. I do not regret having
shot this man, under the circumstances. I only regret the
existence of the circumstances that compelled me to do so.'



<pb n="246"/>
246          A TORTURED HEART
"I comprehend, my dear young friend. You are 
fectly right."                                      , 
"Then I hope that when your usual bedtime arrives yo
will retire to rest, sir, and leave him to my care." .i
'"My bedtime has arrived, i r. Gower; so if you are 
solved to sit up with him, I will just give you a few simp
rules for his treatment hdring the night, and I will direcii
one of the menservants to bring a mattress into the ba
entry out there, and lie down within call, if you shcu'l
need him."
"Thank you, Mr. Efinstar.. Tell me now what I,am m
do. I will be careful to obey directions,' 
"Here, then, on this table is a bowl of ice, a pitcher- :
water, a cup of beef tea, a bottle of brandy, a vial of laud4
num and a spirit amip. 'Warm the beef tea over the "sp
lamp, and give it to him fr  tWie to time. ' If he shoul
be restless, give him : irty drops of laudanum in half 
wineglassful' of brandy-utless he should be feverish, i
which case give him the ladanum in' water instead' of i
brandy. If his head should be hot bathe it in ice wa t
and keep napkins wet with, the same on his forehead. 
you should want assistance, call Aason, the man whom
shall leave in the hall to attend your orders. But if vo'
should need counsel, send him to call me. Do 'yb un
stand?"   '         ' 
'Perfectly    .    i.                        . 
"Then I will say goodonight," eaid the old gentleman,
he arose to leave the room. :                       i
'"Good-night to you, sir," courteously replied the you
man, who, as soon as he was left alone, elosed the door .i
seated himself in the easy-chair by the bedside.. .
The patient slept quietly.         .
Mr. Hamilton Gower, leaning back in his chair,
closed eyes, heard the subdued noises of the- servants et't
gaged in closing the doors and windows of the house-;,
cautiously as they could, to avoid disturbing the wound
and sleeping man. 
Finally he heard the man whom Mr. Elfinstar hadi ?ile
as a night attendant lay down his mattress in the entry a
let himself drop upon it.                        '
Then all was silent.                           ' '
. '.,
'. '  '  *. * *** : ^' i l



<pb n="247"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   247
He listened, if perchance he might hear the step or the
voice of Seraph Elfinstar.
But he heard nothing of the sort.
And he had not bidden her good-night! He had come
out of the drawing room at the request of her father to see
the wounded man, and had left her standing at the window.
He had certainly expected to return to her side, and to
have finished the evening in her company; but instead of
doing so he had suffered himself to be beguiled into close
attendance upon the patient.
He felt as if he had been cheated out of the pleasure of
her society, and even out of the privilege of bidding her
good-night.
But, at all events, he knew that he should see her in the
morning, and that she would warmly approve his action in
taking care of the wounded man during the night.
His task was not a very hard one; indeed, the patient
was so quiet, and the household so still, that Mr. Hamilton
Gower, leaning back in his chair, dozed lightly-so lightly
that he heard the very breathing of his patient.
After two hours the breathing became sighing, and the
watcher arose and looked over the sleeper, and examined
his features by the lowered light of the hanging lamp.
The latter opened his black eyes and looked full into
those other black eyes bending over him.
"How do you feel by this time, Ham?" inquired Mr.
Gower.
"What in the furies do you mean by calling me Ham?"
demanded the wounded brute, with a savage scowl.
"Mr. Duplicate Hawke, then! How do you feel?" in-
quired Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"You are a lunatic ! Let me alone!" 'growled the wound-
ed ruffian, making an attempt to turn away from his nurse;
but instead of doing so he uttered a howl of pain and sank
down upon his back again.
Mr. Gower arose and measured out thirty drops of lauda-
num in a wineglass, filled it half full of brandy, and put it
io the lips of the sufferer, saying:
"Drink this; it will relieve you."
He got a sniff of the brandy and swallowed it eagerly.
sighing with satisfaction as he muttered:
"Ah-h-h   That's the right sort I"



<pb n="248"/>
248          A TORTURED HEART-
"Lie still and try to sleep now, Ham," said his nurse.
"There you are again  Who in Hades is Ham?" growled> +
the patient.
"Ah    I beg your pardon again, Mr. Duplicate Hawke," :
said the watcher. 
"And who in a legion of demons is Mr. Doublecake AHI ?. L
You are an idiot or a lunatic-one or t'other I" growled ',
the man.
"Come, come, Ham Gow-       " began the nurse; but..
suddenly think that contradiction might excite and injure 
his patient, he stopped short.
" 'Ham Gow ' You're the third person as has called mein:.
that name in the last six weeks! What in the foul fiend '
do you mean by-      Oh-h-h !  The man suddenly broke;,
off, and groaned with pain.
"You had better not try to talk. To do so causes you to iB
suffer. Lie still and the opiate you have taken will put you i,
to sleep," said Mr. Gower.                        '
"I'd like to get hold of that cove who emptied his revoI-I
ver into my insides!" growled the ruffian, grinding hsi
teeth.                    . 
It was clear that, owing to the change of dress and ap- J
pearance, together with the change of place and circum-
stances, the convict had failed to recognize in his gentle-*'1
manly attendant the rough wayfarer who had shot him.  .i:^
And, though Mr. Hamilton was a truthful man, he di:t
not deem it wise on this occasion to enlighten his patient, aft
such enlightenment would not have conduced to th benefiti
of the latter.                              :        A
He warmed some beef tea over the spirit lamp, and per- 
suaded the wounded man to swallow a few spoonfuls. 
Then the convict lay back on his pillow and murmured ;;
"I wonder whatever makes people call me Ham-what
is it ?" 
"Ham Gow. And they call you so because you once went '
by that name, whatever you may call yourself now," replied'i'!
Mr. Hamilton Gower.                                 ,
"See here, mister, you're all wide of the mark; though' !]:
reckon I must look like that cove, or so many people would .ia S
not mistake me for him. Give me a drop of brandy. I feel ;''t
weak as a rat!"                                   :' 
Before complying with the man's request, Mr. Gower puit 'i
' e*ta



<pb n="249"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   249
his hand on the patient's head. Finding it free from fever,
he poured out half a glass of brandy and gave it to him.
"That's the right sort!" breathed the patient, with a sigh
of satisfaction.
Mr. Gower, who now began to doubt seriously whether
the counterpart before him was the genuine Ham Gow,
would have liked to ask questions, but refrained for fear
of exciting and injuring his patient.
The convict, however, was not disposed to keep silence.
Stimulated and strengthened by the brandy and the beef
tea, he felt inclined to talk.
"What made you call me HIam-whats-his-name?" he
again demanded.
"I have already told you-because I believe you to be
Ham Gow," answered Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"You do?"
"Yes, I do."
"You really do?"
"Yes, I really do! And I much wonder why ,you should
try to play off this deception upon me, a man who has
known you intimately from your infancy upward!" said
Mr. Gower.
The poor convict put his hand up to his head with a puz-
zled look and reflected.
"I wonder if I have gone light-headed !" he murmured.
"For I'm sure I don't remember ever to have seen this
gentleman before in all the days of my life, though he says
he has known me from boyhood!"
Mr. Gower began to lose confidence in his own convic-
tions.
"If you are not Ham Gow, who on earth are you?" he
could not help asking, even though the question should
throw his patient into a fever.
"A cove that looks extremely like him, I suppose, since
I have been taken for him in both hemispheres--"
"You have?"
"Yes, sir! First time, had to leave England in a hurry
one morning; got aboard a fishing smack and offered the
skipper twenty pounds to forego his fishing for that week
and take me over to the coast of France. Skipper accepted
offer and called me Ham Gow for the whole trip. I didn't



<pb n="250"/>
250          A TORTURED HEART 
let on as Ilwas anybody else. I didn't care what he call;bj
me, so he didn't call me back to England."
"Oh-h-h !" exclaimed Mr. Hamilton Gower, as the ight,
began to break in upon his mind.        "
"Second time, nearly a month after that, came back tql
England, thinking to get oft to America, but was nabbe4
.by the charlies-not for myself, 'but as Ham Gow, the de&
mon chaw him! And I was kept in prison until some offcS
found me out to be-somebody else. And then I was kep
in prison on my own account, and finally sent out here." ?.
"Ah !" exclaimed 'Mr. Hamilton Gower.          ; 
"Third time, about six weeks ago, I was working in thi
chain gang on the road when up comes a young woman
looks me in the face, screeches, 'Ham Gow!' and goes 4
into the 'high strikes.' '", , 
"'m: ph !" muttered Mr. Qower.'                 -^'
"And, fourth and last time-as yet I-lere comes yoi
whom I never saw before in all the days of my life, telin
me to my face that I am Ham   opw, and must be aRi
Gow, whether or no, and that you have known me evt
since I was a child'!  ' -             ' 
,"You certainly bear a most extraordinary likeness toi'i
man you have been taken for; but,' since yod are not:  i
who are you?"    .   .  :     .  '        ' .      ''
"That is none of your'business, my fine gentleman. Gi.
me some brandy; I am getting faint again."'   ' .
"I am afraid to give you any so soon again. It mi
raise your fever."        ' 
"Fever be blowed! I'm as cold as ice,: and as wea
water! Feel my head! Feel my pulse! There, dont
an idiot! Give me the brandy."    : 
The sinking man spoke faintly, yet vehemently. :l 
Mr. Hamilton Gower poured out a half glass of br
and gave it to his patient.  .''
"I am very glad that you are not the man I misi
you for! I was deeply grieved and shocked to think tjl
Ham Gow, my boyhood's old friend, should have--  '[""i
Mr. Hamilton Gower stoppe.d short in his impuii
speech. He would not willingly wound the feelings ..;'
felon on his deathbed.                          ; 
"Done such a thing as I did, eh? Well, now, dona S'|
go offat a tangent! I never meant to harm a hair of i
, ,/4,~!,8



<pb n="251"/>
.'; ,,.  ':  '~,  ,
': ',,'?','?,' ,'~,~ ' M,/i' :: .
""'"'':'''''''1
I"'   ' 0...~'~,'....
jho~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~' ""   ' '"''
mjte  r                        '.; z'
pou ted t.. 
., the dotor creh:d O. I.1 liid . ./, !.'n h.% .i..'* ,. . .'.
word.et di    tX:
l^  ^  miBter, " !.,i^  , :  ',  ~  . - , . .  ,, .. L
urse, wn .' ', ho
This new
qtuiettled
'?'a distant .l            tlt'i  '"...': .'",  *
"Thank Hnwk, j -
 :heord el~:,tw'stt_',.,': "-: ,  *:.:',
And lees tJe . ... 
iu.t  ovedayr  the ''. ,    :i:  .
b ent over the'  . ':  '  '.'.' '  ' ,  , ,.'
|  Mr.mh tUower laidt a hasod hon 'f' . ,.' ,',. '..,:"
t Itwas rathe^hd ibys d
Iapk  cewatrn dlto       int
'ki,. to him f'              , thr.h,
4l."aht:edoctowould ,.  o e,  ' . .
^^Th dcidno r to lftb w~hb *ut -~a -
ab. at~t~t~-'
d     '
the  setlet`   '  k~i *?;'



<pb n="252"/>
m2           A TOBTUREDD HEAT .:
The door opened, and old Mr. Elfnstar, wrapped in 
Japanese flowered silk dressing gown, entered the room 
came softly up to the bedvide, whispering his question: 
g"ow is our patient?"
"He is sleeping, as you see, but he is feverish," rep
the young man.
"I knew, of course, that if he should live throught
night he would be feverish this morning. How did
pass the night ? 
"Restlessly until I gave him the second dose of l
anum, since which time he has slept quietly," answered 
Hamilton Gower.
"Now, then, my yog friend, I will relive your wa
if you will go to your room and lie down andsleep,"
the old grptleman. 
"I thank you, Mr. ElfinStar, but really I could not 
ven if I 'should lie down, and I have no desire to do eit
I feel anxious to hear the doctor's report of this case.
do you suppose he will be here?" inquired M r. H
Gower.
"We may expect him very soon, I thi*. At any 
my young friend, though you will not lie down.and
sleep, you may, at least, go to your room and refresh
self with a bath, and by the time ,you get through b
fast will be ready," suggested the old entleman.
"I think I will take your advice, said Mr. Hsm
Gower rising and giving up his position to hi hot,
immediately took it.
Mr. Gower went to 'is room, attended by "the .
who had been appointed to serve him, and whom he f
waiting at the foot of the stairs. ,
He took a bath, changed his drew, brushed his j
hair and beard and went down to the brekfast 
which he was ushered b   "the boy," and where he
Migs ltastir seated bdre the tea urn at the head d
table.                                        .i
She was prey attil red in a pale-blue Jaa
wrapper, and her fair, golden-huedhair was boua 
a pale-blue ribbon, and flowed, as upaal, dovi.,
gracefl shoulders. 
'>Mr. Hamilton Gower bowed deeply as he ,e  i
.  X\ r\i
* i . %. . we L.-im 



<pb n="253"/>
A TR'Jffi" UEAU fRT
presence, and offered hs hnd. as he approached her and
bade her good-morning.
"My father says that you were ei kind as to sit up with
the wounded man last night How is he this moring?"
inquired the young lady, when these salutations had passed
between them.
"He is sleeping, or he was when I left'himn hlf an hour
ago. He has some fever, however, this morning," replied
the young gentlemsn.
"That is quite natural under tbe circmstce    Father
expected as much," said Miss Elfietar.
As she spoke the old gentleman entered the rsom.
"Ah, Mr. Gower! You are here befre me. Well, our
patient is still sleeping, but he begins' to intter in his
sleep. I think his fever is rising, I have left Mr. Annis,
our housekeeper to sit with him until our return. Seraph,
my dear, ring for the coffee. We will have breakfast at
once," said Mr. Elfinstar.'
His daughter complied with his request, al  breakfast
was served.
While they were still at table, Jopa Stackpole, the man
who had been dispatched on the previous evening to Hobart
Town to fetch a phyica, returned and entered the break-
fast room.
"Well, toopole, have you  ought the doctor?" inquied
his master. X
Y "es, your honor, and two constables to 'the heels of
him," replied the man, pulling his red hair by way o a
t   salute.
"Constables ".
"Yes, your honor; 'tis the jail doctor I went for, seeing
the hurted man were in the convics clothes, wh1ic they
.also sent two oonstables to fetch him in case he should be
discovered to be a bblter and found able to be taken back."
"Where have you left the doctor and the officers, Jonas "
"In the sitting room on the left side of the hall, if you
please, sir."
"I will see them immediately. Will you eome, Mr. Gow-
er?" inquired the old gentleman, rising.
aCertainly," repie    he  oung man, following his ex-
"smple.
:   \  .



<pb n="254"/>
.'**!;; :  ;                        ' '  '  ''^iB
Thy both left the mn  poae paaee4 into the palor
Stackpo  had left the vieitor,.         :
There 4r tlfinafar fapud Dr. Boggs, the red-faced
ioundbodied surgeon, and ttwo stout constableL.  ^.
Hea bowed corteouely, an  ,begged them to be eated
"I thank you, an; but e. would rather see the w i4
man at.once, not only to examine into his condition b
also to identi  him if practicabe; for we ruspect him :o
no other than tba, eclaped convict, Jack lHioe who bl
about six weeka ago, and wbo has bfed pursuit ever einc
nidD, .:      . -       ''  .  ' ;
. Very w  , .the, my:,      sir, we will proceeed to
patient's .ede, re     i Mr. Efinstar, turning to e
the'.wa~ i  : .                                    ;
When the prt, entered the:sick camber they found
honPkeeper 'ftill eated by the bedside of the patient
wrs moanig in his restlas  e. le' 
"You ~may retire now, Mr.      s. I will ring if y
should be wanted," eaid Mr. Elfnm , leading the vi
te the bedside.  ,     , .        . 
The hobuekeeper arose, bent her head and went :oati
te r..c... .r..
Dr. Boa tooped over the leepr 
,"Ye, it if-  :  c . suapected..  e. is the fugitive co
Jack Hioe.      ;'
;  "HIw lding Mbse been in thin  olony, and of whti
ha he been     vited?" ai         inqired~ Mr. Ha
ton  ower, w. o was stil prof tai  y aaffeted by the pa
rseemblance of the o-calUed' Jick Hiee, the convict, *4
own old companion, Ham Gow, the tramp,.that' he wasI
in doubt whether they were not one and the s*ime ...:I
"He has been in the pal settlement here, alto
about eight years; but since his last conviction, only'
a.year. It wa a burglary in London, eomnitied
eighteenmonths ago; but be so succeefully eluded the
that he was. not arrested until three :ionbths
whBn he was tried, convicted, and eentenced t. teo t
transportation. He is a very hard case," conclud
doctor, who then turned and began to ewmime the
of the wounded man.
Mr. Hamilton Gower now.felt oamtincd that i
could not be his own tramp, suddenly precipitated



<pb n="255"/>
i ''" "  ,'  '' ''  ;A ' 'm " ,t~.*"  '.., '' ''*: ,S.:.' .',', .
ithe depth  t of hdiUbo; d;hf c'd 'i
extraordiinar&!y aihd i n ec
the two. en; i Bfit,fUe. ,  .mpt^   ,r ^a' ge,.
ture, exact owpttxp # e ;t ote  o$ idti  : ;'
When hbhad f  mitnet.  ,  < ,eX,  ite.arli  n a: .the' '
' way to the new old al  '.t; W,f it"  .
; rant all abot mth, 'epe'it: oasoe  ip the "/ eigh _boi  . 
hood of HawkeiB'e :;  :!a:t   bei..i  't ,aco "
. ubiquityof the oani m G'w 'i, d.i ehqul. iraclt:
multiplicity ttbr ai o.:  , . ; it  t   ' 
And now *i. Haltou Qriowr  d tb*frystery
The trpm    0 B fa :aiiitly : ti  Hui2et-^
who had foa ~hthdci     r I the '*b ,ixt
of Stony FOe%: do te oni of is flight ! Hrawg
ville.  '  :      ..  1'  * ' " .  ' .. . .. ' :  '  .
The earl w   nthe a'oii t 0wi,  ' ws" i  e r   lth
train with  p         day  hi     r
t HawkewooLd  .. 
And the fel.a wt ui thd Ham w, who hd ects,
to France o Abbott'   nag m.mini wi theoniiH , tb
homicide at HW^ ,           , M,
All was tieat r,  , whene c, Ith extor
likenes  betbeeti  if0 :xiioS;r to 
so different ix c ohnrater ua the er}L the  ' i.the 
.felon?     .   ,
' While Mt. gIauiltoig ao4i: d: qth)es *iorMu over
; in his mind the poundoeto  xBuinib   the womuned of
the man Hice, wro wa w.tee, Wneaia a'  't
r with pain. The m rgeos toc  eemed to 
I' Re winced e n4 ri. thed. 
,"I win not hmr .ot  e bit *me thi n I a  ,aiby h
n my man, but, t mustti  tb you jr izes, yox am-ao" sid
SDr. .Boggs, kiidly.  .  -       ; * ;
Hice groaned .in respon e.a 
The surgeon blled foi his e'ad teb  i  fiom
t them lint, ealPve. l  bag  CaiBj(  e d
II forth. These ii    iIn r '44'i 'i he
1ioeduide.         ,  .
Then he called for warm wat& wi c was Isgt.
Finally he washed and drese;e the *w*t(  be L
.i .Maf  w ptiooied, hi bedoth  a'f
!it  t arid oompooing draoght, and left hbi to repow



<pb n="256"/>
UI6       A TORTURED HEART 
"Will you sit by the patient for a few minute, st
wish to speak to Mr. Elfinstar and these officers a
whispered the doctor to Mr. Hamilton Gower.    ;
"Certainly," assented the young man.
The doctor gathered his salves, lints, bandages, a
forth, into his saddlebags again, directed the boy to 
away the basin of water and the towels, and then sig
Mr. Elfinstar and the two constables to accompany 
from the room.
When the four men were again in the parlor the do
said:
"Hice is very dangerously, and, I fear, fatally wou
The charge entered his left side below the ribs, p
entirely through his body and came out on the right .1
It would be next to a miracle if the ball should have pa
through the man's body without fatally wounding l
vital part. Still, I have read of one such case in which
injuries were not mortal; but no human being, no d
however great his skill and experience, could tell for at
tainty whether this man is mortally hurt or not The 
nosis is so far extremely unfavorable; but nothing sho
a post-mortem examination could enable anyone to d
the exact nature of these internal injuries. A few h  H
must decide his case for life or death."
"What can be done in the neantime, doctor ?" in
Mr. Elfinstar.
"Nothing can be done to avert death if his inju
what I think; but much, in any case, may be doneto a
ate pain."
"He must not be move ?" 
"Of course not Removal would be certain death to
I will leave one of these conataba on guard-thogh
is no danger of the prisoner ruming away at this j
I think-and I will take the 6ther and return to ,
Town to report the case to the commandant. Before
I will leave carefully written directions for the tra
the wounded man, and I will see him agp in the  '
to-morrow."
The hospitable master of the Mountain Hermita
asked the surgeon whether he and his compa
breakfasted. 
Tb.: otor replied that they had left Hobett:
*                 ,,    ;.f~~~~~~~~~~~k~'~'r~1



<pb n="257"/>
A l tOtukED HEART T7'
fore the dawn of day, and had therefore, had no opportiu
nity for such refreshment.
"Then please walk into the nxt room, where I have had
breakfast prepared for yon," ~aid Mr. Efinatar, as he led
the way to the  ell-spread table
While the visitors were breakfating their horses were
resting and feeding.
An hour later they Were all on their way back to Hobart
Town.
Mr. Efinstar went back to the bedide of the wounded
man, whom he found now in a high fever, and as restless
as any sufferer could be whose wounds made every motion
painful, and so restrained him from tossing about
He was still watched by Mr. Hamilton Gower, who had
just laid a cold, wet cloth over his forehead.
"How do you feel by. this time, my man?" kindly in-
quired the old gentleTran..
"Feel as if 1 was in --, where I Shall be in a few
hours, I reckon," growled the convict.
"No; the doctor gives hopes of your recovery, and we
mean to do the very best we can to insure it."
"Don't; I don't want to recover. I want to die and be
dine of it," groaned the man, clinching his hands and
straining his head back in pain.
"Few of us are preparedto die. Are you?"
"As well as ever I shall be ' Ohl-h-h I"
"I hurt you by making you talk. Mr. Gower, my dear
sir, I will take your place for the present. Go you and get
a little fresh air. You will find my daughter somewhere in
the grounds at this hour."
The young man, "nothing loath," arose, and, saying:
"I hope you will summon me, sir, as soon as I can be
of any service," bowed and left the room.
He strolled out upon the grounds and soon found biss
Elfinstar, seated in an arbor on the highest terace  Her
garden hat was lying at her feet, and her yellow hair was
flowing over her graceful shoulders, glistening in the morn.
ing light like a mantle of the golden fleece.
She had been reading, but she laid aside her book on his
.approach.
;   . "Bow is the poor soul?" she inquired, as she signed for



<pb n="258"/>
U ! , '             i ''           ,' ?A .f*
him to Bit beside ^e wi aBim, cbi h d it
patting the bnI with her had' . :    ' b
i "He is gm t pain," aPwe.ed the oug man, i:
o the indixcted seat.          , 
'1 "lahe in danger?"' 
' "In'pe  dntge '" I  f ' 'thni o, I  noter,  : evi' e
surge o, i*ar at thiif j^cture tiU the iniet  or exiut "
lih d'me . 'er         .',       ' . "  .i
"Where iihe hurt? :,   ha te,Tll been ehtractes
she inquired,. with a pcist ncy of intereat that rally 
tremed her eompaion, wodaIan!eed,  vely:
The ie s     i      "itmal. t:iall p.sse. hrog i
bfltiea that hiis jzie are g aNea.t a'
"Ohk 1 said the yog  r, very exffy; ait sE
n ,b niioe question about lhe dying - on'c 6 t .
They weree both silent Or a . tew  "iofts, ,T / 
.mn waw looking out oeor thnp x ogiit PBie' oo f
try ci:^.de byi thle elevate pit  v
wooded decline of the mo ntaii  ' theii 'tt 
eooop. of tbe oded  e tha.t aeeie 4o fir f bei
the silver. .ine of, the Berwent !ite1 , that ,-~mei
through the d   of forest trees at tfa bctpom of the
the    g  be      o, .t."i dia. nt-- g h.outai.
. ague umnit took ll beautif, l hues a gre;i oIt.pM
,  nopl, a4 th#ey. beded with the snowy, guld ppd c i
o the bori on         . 
*Wbat a lovIy conetry l; hat a peradietl' i i^ti;
tile yp gl 0ma  he gaEds  i      '; t''
;'  *Yee; it i8 Svifw0RHW  kith a, tro ical , ii4 trop(<U
e; ' . ' getifon,' ant.' m, e'"y. ,:.   '   <.
"Yo have ben in        ?  ui   Mr. Ha'
,O, w   .er.  .     .   ..    ,. 
; "ee; mnny timine" she a r 
". Pardlon. my curiodiit ia not idle or imipe 'n :
s'rr., you; it is~ ini   by the derp .Qe.t that ;'i
fbr-for your fathe and for yourself-but, bea
this situation , t hid izmyself wozring that a g^
o, Ieh ad hpjio, with a i;       lovl  i
a~d h oose o   live out her 
bfron all aenned and civiliyed so~ity. I  the qii
aOt hi intrlusive on--          ' "  , 
.r~               ~ ' ~'i~~~~~~~~~i'~.~ ~~~
..'4 -?           ' , '~  ,



<pb n="259"/>
}.e  'topped e dde, t. E"sa  eat. ," ,' :'etis vbf, ~"
int si:ve obhe; :i y ';w ,t W  ite  ' '  ' *;, 
Mlr. Hafil ton G wer   tbrte gpae  by irti
and eduieat^!i'ibonadri a  btt little' witth the plibt
world, and kr*e bht itt  4~it wnvetntaUi e 
not that, as a rule, with bnt few ,xeeptions, these eonve"
tionalitie  4i.te ipi-'perona uetion l '  eat
Now -heW    a  etd ei tw  tret aud iha;,-t .,
HiS yon   m4hostes arai  e as 'eathI eveI to bo 
lips, whih had aue      -o-e hp&         u 
He feltthat thiA deatbi; 'ei:  ad been a e  .by hi ;
own word, yet heflt. a8bo, that  it ot eeem iDto
tice this agit0i'-ta tto d o *) Iabe tblda4in  to
injury"; that b h tn ianifI  drop m te nabft and t
the conversation.                  '     ,:
He did e wi)i tet ind ldiekcy,
"Yes, a hemitege so lveiy ass ti mia we"l 'att-m
.   any man whb ia fopd Bstud and blituic, The giroa d  .:
re beautf the piet-t             h   detti  1
his eyes waadrde eyw e but i  .thi  e biof h ooni.
'.  panion.                 , 
.   " Shall --  b        t pl P.'." e , i ,   .
low and hitn t'.         . .            .;:'
"lf you ttpleafe:' ,le n ed, piegip Ierardgafhat
, ..from the groid  itn. . < it to .e .with: a ibow ; ' 
I;': She thane; hTim * ,e,6,i ',, ca~ig it ia er :ad, ft: . ,
t' he art worhde Elke t: 'ra.i t:w tai  h'epooed tera.ce 'nd
round to the bhi of tle I,  where groves of fruit Iteei
-figs, oranges, pegnl  etR, i  ahd ot*r choie 
^  rieties-grew iha e w d were  arbors  adet with
. .peviaes, ihited  yepos e  1  "'*  * ;*''.  * ,  ,
It would tae too ddch  a  d sp to      be a
i the charms ot thbee para di aie  and gr
T'e young ~sranger, attended by a  'svey yo ng b eing
>~ se angelic ~eabty see bed i  perect haoi wit her
u  r tndms passeedl everal hours in w erid o
:s=y .. .es~ ,  or aog iragraat vgrois, o byi,y'a.ims or
;" s lhig' fotitauin, resltngo occasiaM   OeOike rastie
.,j.:t.e. seat under the hade Qf some Wide;ep-rea  forest
;'ie, I r in the reess of me cool' grmtte :t ro~severed 
t througt all & ieir eii paS iide'it wi  the ywong



<pb n="260"/>
2BS60        A TORTURED HEART 
man observed that his "peri" was as pensive as she who hadl
been banished from Paradise, and whose story had beenp!s
told by a mortal poet.
Had this "Seraph" been banished from   her heaven?,i.
What had she left behind? What had she lost? What hatae
she suffered ?
He could not tell, and he dared not ask a question, o:,
even hint a question. He had had enough of trying thati
sort of experiment 
Of one thing he would have given much to be assured-i,,
that it was not a lover whom she was lamenting.
The first dinner bell, sounding from the open windows,
recalled them to the house.
They parted in the hall, each to go to his or her ownfl'
room to prepare for dinner.
Mr. Hamilton Gower, who had recovered his saddlebags,. 
was unusually careful with his toilet. 
He had become deeply and painfully interested in th,!
young lady of the house, not only for the beauty of her
face and form, though that was of the most exquisite or-
der; nor from the rare loveliness of her character, thoug
that was unequaled in his experience of life; nor from th!
mystery which surrounded her position, though that ab-!
sorbed and perplexed hi: mind; but, perhaps, from all the
causes combined, and also from a subtle magnetism thata
she unconsciously exerised over him.
The second dinner bell interrupted his reveries, an4.
called him down into the drawing room, where he found hi&
host and hostess awaiting him.
"Give your arm to Miss Elfinstar, if you please,
young friend," said the old gentleman, waving his h
toward the door that led toward the dining room.
"How have you left our patient?" inquired Mr. Hamil,
ton Gower, as soon as they were seated at the table. 
"His fever increases; he is very much excited; he evit
dently believes that he is going to die. He has asked
see a minister," answered the host, as he sent a plate
soup down to his guest. 
"He I That ruffian-that desperado, who 'fears not
neither regards man ' He asks for a minister 1" er1l v
the young man, in surprise. 
"Ah! my young friend," sighed the host, 



<pb n="261"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   361
'A deathbed's a detecter of the heart.'
'Conscience doth makes cowards of us all.'
And I fear that man's conscience is a moral cesspool. I
sent Jonas Stackpole back to Hobart Town two hours ago
to fetch the jail chaplain-a good and earnest man, I have
heard-and    hope he will arrive here before night."
"Papa, dear, who is with him now?" inquired Miss
Elfinstar.
"Mrs. Annis, my child. I always leave Mrs. Annis with
him when neither Mr. Gower nor myself are on guard."
"Will you let me go and take Mrs. Annis' place after
dinner, papa ?"
Mr. Elfinstar hesitated; then answered, doubtfully:
"You make a strange request, Seraph. It would scarcely
be wise in me to grant it. The man is a ruffian, my dar-
ling."
"He is a ruffian by birth and training, I suspect, papa.
He cannot help being a ruffian, poor soul! And, besides,
he is now a ruffian wounded unto death, and cannot hurt
anyone," pleaded the gentle being.
"That may all be true, my dear. And, besides-I ought
to tell you, I suppose, though I did not intend to trouble
you with the matter, and should not have done so had you
not asked to go to the man-but he has begged to see you."
"There!" exclaimed Miss Elfinstar, triumphantly.
" The young lady,' he said, 'whom he had frightened, but
whom he never intended to injure beyond the taking of her
jewelry.'"
"You see he is human, after all, papa, dear I You will
let me go to him immediatley, will you not ?"
"Yes, my child, I will take you to him," said the old gen-
tleman, rising.
But before they could leave the room the door was opened
by Jonas Stackpole, who bobbed his red head and an-
nounced:
"Parson is here, your honor."
"Indeedl You have brought him very quickly. I did
not expect you back for some hours yet."
"Met parson on the Hobbyton road, sir."
"Ahl that explains it. Where have you left his rev.
erence P"
I. *



<pb n="262"/>
,      ,   . A 'TU       iK               * ;' 
"In the psrlor,       ,        . ...
tI wil see bim at oloce. My de erana*ph, you mu 
your visit to the dying man until after the chaplain',
seen hin. You understand the neesity o that?"' :
"Oh, perfectly, ny dear father, rplied, the  uig 
"Will you'eomeP" o,           ':     ,  :. 
"Certainly, if mypreanee would not be deemed an,
trusion," Baid the young gentlemnn, as he followi& his
trom the dixing room.                          *
They found the tev. Mr. Heron, chp       of oe ict
seated in an easy-atiir. '  wars .a tall, pale, reined ar
intellectual-looking man, with dark heir and dark e
Ah, reverend  irt. In    wvery glad ,to ee you 
claimed the master of te Mountain Heri    e,
ing his clerical Visitor wih '   oateLetc ed 
Rev. Dr. Heron,.I preiTP e?" 
"Mr. Heron, at your service, eir," said the chaplain, '"
a bow.
"Ah, es 1 My Bamne. i  ' fitwtar."
hef chaplain bowed.
'"And this gentlen, is Mr. Gover, of whoat mamre
amd by." ' 
,  Ieesser Heron and Gowir  luted eah other.
"Well; Mr. Heron, I am happy. to see that y
arrived mch sooner them we eold have hoped to. ee yo
"I wais so fortunate as to meet your reseaengp on.
toad. when I was on my way to see 'h wod~ , ma~no*w 
your house, whom our sgee, recod     daB Jack  ii,
of my unhappy floqk, and whom he reprto.d tobe W
yping condition. I   came *way 4at e e, o  . wRhat. ,
do for him."                                  . .
"'Right, reverend sir; the wretched. man has asked 
yon, and as he is very low, perhaps I had better take
to his bedside at once."
"If you please, Mr. Elfintar." 
"Come, then. Come, also, Mr. Gower."
The three gentleme' proceededto the sick roem. .:
Mr. Efinetar   nt away the woman who waRt 
there, and then codncted the minier, to the 
:Mr, Heron looked on the prostrated 'wre
was all the suferer's violent and habitual i
self in the jail; forgotten was everthIng zeltni
.~ ~ '                    ,   ; .f'#. 



<pb n="263"/>
T'-s'"/' '; " *'.  ' ,"  t',  '     +   ...' '. . . ., , ,  , , ,
ti i, but that-rit hthe ad thy the dufferi ind
.I euin:ier, needig his ,unistrati.    .. .        ,,
."You 'wished toee .me, ioeP.:' he said, in a gentl
tone, as he bent over the ad     cnri       ..eature. 
"I wantd ti see y   r-'see -ye' .    h.O -h ,  If I
were a Rton   Ct       -ab'iat     to make a confs
sion. As itis,; I wantt to tells to ry-- Oh.0 hh! 
brute, coinvictdeopeado,  sai :do , I aI  te ae  of a
belted earl            :, .- 
      ,   ,   ,.
CHA;PTW      x I
"YES, ir; and, p     ts, you may- tr bu  t I reat
it-thief, covimt, deperado '   I am called I a6a the son of
a belted earl;,thlem of 'peer o f Engandt You will be-
lieve me when 'I tell you my tory," eaid the dying teloa,
in a faint voice.
"Had we not beter retire?' iunqired Mr. lflftar, in a
low tone.                                       ..
:  "Why?" demanded the eon, anmost in a whiper.      ,
"Because yot nmy p    tefer to tel ybur story to youw mnin.
ister alone," etPlamned the.old gent ian. 
"Not a bit o' it; but I 'wuld lie some more brandy,"
* mnrmured the eonvict.     .
Mr. Elfr tarn praed Out half a gla  of brandy, tred
into it a sit .spoo full do ondesd bqef juice, and gave
.> it to the sinki  wa. -o.
.Then the th"e  slsene.e 1ioster, str, r, aand
, Heron, seated theh e lves around the bed to hear the on"
viCs story, and to adinieter, frm time to time tIe trong
support that was needed to kee    p his failing strength
'. to the end. 
"I wish one of yo  sir, would take pan ad ibk'and
note down my word as I speak them, for-, fothere's 4
iman pursued with Wamnta e for a crime that I ebuitte
-the one crime that'weigh  heaviest cn mts    at thi
hour. That wam the re   , getolemei, I 'wnt youa all to
bereentwhile I tell my stoy, tt ;t          duly it
;'     ed             ' .   . .              .
1.,'      <. 'Vq  '                '.'                 . '    .'



<pb n="264"/>
264          A TORTURED HEART
Mr. Elfinstar left the room to procure writingmat
and soon returned with a small, portable writing 
which he placed upon a little table by the bedside, befo
the minister.
"You will find all that you require in there, reveren
sir," said the old gentleman, as he resumed his seat.
The chaplain bowed and opened the desk.
The convict began his story.
Perhaps his most interested listener was the gentlem
who called himself Mr. Hamilton Gower.
Somewhat strengthened by the strong sustainant that h
had just taken, the man spoke in a less faint voice.
"I told you that I was the son of an earl, and I am-
son of the late Right Honorable Roscius Hawke, fifteen
Earl of Hawkewood."
Here one of his hearers started involuntarily and 
eagerly toward the speaker.
"He was not the Earl of Hawkewood then, however.
was only Capt. Hawke, of the --th Hussars, when he ma
ried the gypsy girl who became my mother."
"Married " repeated the three gentlemen in a breath. :,
The dying convict glared at them through his bla
cavernous black eyes, and growled forth:
"Yes, married-I said married   What do you mean 
staring at me? Capt. Boscius Hawke, of --  th Hssa
afterward Roscius, fifteenth Earl of Hawkewood, in
Peerage of England, did really marry Radiance Gow, w
became my mother."
The look of amazement, dashed with incredulity, on
faces of the three gentlemen was too much for the con
dying as he was; he burst out into a feeble laugh, 
laughing, said:
"Oh, don't be alarmed  I am not a claimant of the
dom of Hawkewood. I shall not disturb the succes
Could not do so for many reasons, even if I should lt
Listen, gentlemen, while I explain:
"It was not the usual infatuation of a poor girl :t
fine gentleman who made love to her that caused my m
to become the wife of Capt. Hawke. Why, the captain
over sixty .years when he first saw the maiden Ra
and she was but fourteen, with no more dreams of lq
marriage than if she had been but four. So much ofe



<pb n="265"/>
A TORTURED HART 
was she that he did not court her, but he bought her of the
tribe. They would not have sold her to him, you may de-
pend, if she had been a born gypsy. But she was not a
gypsy, as the captain perceived at first sight, for she was
such a splendid blonde that they had named her Radiance.
She had a complexion like roses on snow, hair like sunshine,
eyes like stars. Such was my mother.
"So, you see, she was no gypsy, or they never would have
let the captain have her at any price; but she was a waif,
an adopted child of the tribe, and so they sold her to the
captain in consideration of a round sum of money and on
condition that he would marry her according to the gypsy
laws before taking her from their protection, and afterward
by the Christian rites as soon as he should take her to'his
own home and people.
"And so the beautiful, ignorant child of fourteen was
sold and married to the veteran soldier of sixty-odd, accord-
ing to the gypsy laws, under which she had been brought up
and which she held sacred.
"Believing herself to be a wife and 'a lady,' she went
away with the 'kind' old gentleman who had won, not her
woman's heart, for she was not a woman, but her childish
affections by his presents of sugar plums, toys, and finery,
and his promises of much grander things.
"He took her down to Brighton, where his regiment was
stationed, and procured lodgings for her in a retired part
of that gay watering place. But I need not say to men of
the world like you, gentlemen, that the last condition in the
contract made between the gypsies and the captain was
never fulfilled, and that the 'gypsy' maiden was never mar-
ried by Christian rites.
"She did not importune her owner on this subject. She
did not know its importance. She had been married with
the same ceremonies that she had always seen observed at
the weddings of the gypsy men and women, and she was
perfectly satisfied.
"They had lived about a year at Brighton when Capt.
Hawke was placed on the retired list with half pay, and
he took his gypsy wife and her infant child-myself, gen-
tlemen-to Boulogne-sur-Mer, where everything was, at that
time, cheap, and where he could live comfortably on his
half pay.
.- .-



<pb n="266"/>
10G' A          TORTURFp H            '     ,T    '"'
"We lived at Boulogne five years, d g "hich tim
hd tw6 sdeter born wt   di' not stay long in thi' wldi "
and one broter, who was three e    onger than   ylf? 
LWhen I was mrnethng over five, and my brother a  ittle
over two years old, an event ,ocra red, or, rather, I h
my a eries of events followed'eai other i rapid s
sion, and left an ipdelble impresaion upon my memory.
"The first of these was a caastrophe  My por, p
mother was very fond of the sea,and used to take us d
on the sands every fine afterno 
'"One fie afternoon, late in October, she took us dow
to the beach and hired a rowboat to.take us out on th
water. Now, though I renmiber the catatrophe pe
well, I do not remember how it, was brught about; but.^
had not rowed far before the boat was upset 
"I remember perfectly well, asif it had happened yest
day, the sudden lurch the piercing scram of my mother,-'
she had only time for one-te plmge,    h      the  ahAk,  h m
gulation, the struggle, the ringing of many bells in my 
the flashing of many lights into my eyes, until no ofly t
ears and eyes but my whole brain an  bdyseem     to
and to hear-tobe filled with meildy and ilnminatio
float in a buoyant tmosphere of liht and music u
the mental snguish of      and the phyeical angui .
strangulation subsided in a sense of delicious repoq e w
sank into. muncaaeioumne" .. 
Here the onvicts voice showed such signs o 
that Mr. FRflnrtar prepare and ad imaitere-d aother ,a
porting draught.'                                '. 
"I have heard that drwing is. .very eas deoah," 
the old-gentleman, as he took the enmy glais from the .
of the man and placed it on the little stand. 
The convict regarded him for & moment with a h
expresion a he replied:                 . 
"Don't you believe it, sir. Never you go out of .
world by. iter if you can help it-unlews it isto kee .
going out by fire 1 The music, and the i]lnmimntio i'
the sweet, floating sleep, is well enough; bt the 
terror and stranglaton, the angui   of mind, a
agony of body, iomething not as enjosable as
Cdked Up tobe                       / "



<pb n="267"/>
*,  .        ~.  , '  . 1''   . .  . ' . i  . ' 
A  TOWil          ,E    T          *07
"I am not spe~latfig on a     , my' frnd; but go ia
with your narrative," replie Mrd . Mr.finstw.
"' Well,? resume the convi."tb    . ezt th I " was non-
scious of waft the sense of pins ad needles ht semed
to be undulating thugh my nerve instead of    od and
of a body and limbs as cold and heav aa leaL  I tried to
cry, but it hurt me to breathe, much less to ey Oit. I saw
people atading around  me, nd 'realised that I. was in bed
"And, n/w, master," said the convict, turning on hia
host the same humorous smile that sat so stragey on his
dying face, 'there' another bit o adice I would gie: yon
out of my own expei   e. If eve. you should happen to 
go out of the wold by water, don't you ome~baek again_
Drowning ibad enough, but brig         yo  to is a de
worse."
"Go on with your narrative, my friend. My time ia
limited," aid the e.apli* in  g a  tle tome.
"Yes, your reverence. Well, for some time afte my pain-
ful return to eonsciounnees all was conusion within me
and around me. Out of this confuieon, however, some'
distressing circumetanees came to my eogirnwee:  The
st was that I myself had been the only one of the party
who had been saved. My mother, my little brother, and
the boatman who rowed us had all been drowned. The body
of my mother and that of the boatman had been recvered.
The bodr of my little brot   had not yet been found, and,
,~in fat, lt rt-  wasfound. I was saved whem I had rise
or the tbM  time .by a boatman, who seited me by my
clothes aiad i gged me into his boat.
'My' mth'er. remains were interred in the little:cem
etery of t. Sun$eji s t out f the city. : remember th6
funeral, and how 'eqally my mind was divided between
grieir. the loss of my mothet and admiration of my own
black thiUie and knickerbokera, and the black crape .searf
on my cap. 
"Quick ,upon my poor mothers death and buri1a came
another ern*t, qually startling in another way, One day
my father reeeied a letter *  ehieh'exted him,*ry mruh,
and caused him to take a sudden journey tonglrnid, leav-
ing me in the care of a girt named Miaette, wo had been
in my mother's ervice and in her cwnfidene ever since I
could remember. She had oome with my. mther from the
.,A    '           , ' 



<pb n="268"/>
268          A TORTURED HEART
gypsy tribe, having bee, like her, an adopted child of thyi!
wandering people.
"From Minette I learned all that I have told you of my '
mother's early history.                              ^:
"My father returned after a week's absence, and I ntoo
ticed after he came back no one called him 'captain.A'
Everyone called him 'my lord.' And Minette told me tha
he had succeeded to the title and estates of his late unclem
and that he was now the Earl of Hawkewood. I was stil.l
too young and ignorant to appreciate this elevation.
"But I did, to my sorrow, appreciate the misfortune when
our home was broken up, and I was separated from myi
father and Minette and placed alone among strangers in ig
boarding school for small boys, of whom I was the smallest
and the youngest.
"In less than one month my child life had been totally
changed, and I had been bereft of father, mother, brother,
nurse, and home.
"I was, perhaps, the most wretched schoolboy that eve
existed. I saw my father but once after he had bid 
good-by in the parlor of the school. It was a year la
when he came to make me a visit. He paid my bills,
gave me cake, toys, and pocket money. 
"That was the last I ever saw of him.
"Minette, my mother's maid, married a deck hat
went as stewardess on the Vic  steamer, plyingiee
the English and the French ibuet; but whenever the ,
was in port at Boulogne she always came on shore 
watched for an opportunity of seeing me when I walked 
with the school                       .' "
"She was a very pretty and winsome yo1B   woman, a
was known to have been a trusted servant of my fa
and so she was allowed to speak to me. She always .
minded me that I was the Viscount Hawke, the eldest
and heir of the Earl of Hawkewood. 
"Time went on until I was ten years old, and had 
ceived the groundwork of a good education. I had 
heard of my father for years, but I suppose my qu
bills were paid for me by somebody, or I should not 
been allowed to remain at the school.
"When I was about ten years old I lost Minettb wht 
day met me when I was out walking with the shoa  ,
".~ *'
:,  >.X' J



<pb n="269"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    26
told me that was her last trip on the Victoria, as she was
going to be a stewardess on board the Albert, a steamer ply-
ing on the Thames between London and Greenwich. And
the poor woman gave me a guinea and many kisses and
bad me good-by.
"My heart was broken, for Minette was the only creature
on earth who loved me, or whom I loved; and so I lost my
spirits, my sleep, and my appetite. I brooded and brooded
over my lonely life. Other boys had visits and presents
from friends and relatives, and they went home for their
holidays; but I had no visitors and no vacations. I stayed
at the pension from one year's end to another without a
change. The loss of Minette's weekly visits was 'the last
feather.' So I brooded and brooded.
"Well, gentlemen, not to make my story tedious, I began
to think of running away from school. I hoarded up the
guinea given me by Minette, and the half crowns allowed
me for pocket money each week, and I waited for the sum-
mer vacation, which was near at hand, when all the pupils
except my homeless self, and all the masters except the head
one, would go to their several homes for their holidays, and
even I should be allowed some freedom from school dis-
cipline and surveillance.
"When the vacation came and the school was emptied of
all the pupils except my solitary self, and all the masters
except the principal, I counted up my savings and found
that I had two guineas.
"A golden opportunity for flight then came. The prin-
cipal of the school was dangerously ill His wife was in con-
stant attendance ppon him. A steamer was about to sail for
England-the Victoria, in whose service Minette had spent
so many years as stewardess.
"So I picked a little valise that was one of my posses-
sions, dressed myself in my best clothes, watched my oppor-
tunity and took my way down to the pier. I bought my
half ticket at the office window unquestioned, and stepped on
board the boat unquestioned. Too many lads had been
returning home from school by those steamers about this
time for my presence to be questioned.
"When I got to the other side of the Channel my little
valise was overhauled by the custom office; but, as I had



<pb n="270"/>
7O0          A TTUtJEDI HART. 
nothing contraband in it,  was allowed to go my
taking my propefty with e. ' 
"I took a third-cleas paaae in the 'perlijlPnPtrry
for London, where I arrvea with juat ten shiinmg in n
pocket. Whittington had ,le,  I remembered. I inq
of a friendly looking policeman at the Paddington tti
where I got out, where the Greenwich steamers were to b
found,. He directed me, and  'went down to the wh
and, sure enough, there was the Albert,
"I went on board and.asked a good-natured deck hand
the tewardess was on boar  ed iid 'yes,'and alled 
My heart was throbbin wiLth joy at the prospect of m
my dear Mlinette. The stardes cae.        She was.
strangeri  I broke dovn with disappointment and sorrol
and burst into tears. The man and toma were sorry 
me, and when they found opt who it was I wanted they to
me that Minette Taylor and her husband had been emplo
on the steamer, she as stewardess, he as deck hand, for
month, and that they hid then both migrated to 
They had sailed just a week before my arrival; .
"I have had many disappoiitments in my life, gen
men, but I think that was the bitterest I ever experieno
Can you put yourselves in my plae  A poor, truant
of ten years old adrift in the Babylon of  P  I th
"The Greenwich steamer was abut to leave the
ad I had to go on shore, nd there I stood alone. _My.i
impule was to follow my only friend to the Atipods. 
began immediately to inquire about ships for  st
After many rebf ts and much chafing, I wa directed to .
East India       , B'               . :  .,       *
"I went thithher, .and, upon inquiring, foud out
there would not be another ship sail forpthat bourne
the first of the next month, which was mrore than. 
weeks of; and I further foind that even a steerage 
for a-child of ten years would cost fifteen guineas, ^
that time I had not half as many shillings. Be
doubted whether they would take a boy so young as
without the authority and sanction of some pa 
guardian.                   ,
"I never thought of venturing back to schooL  'i
impulse was to seek after my fathei. I .l



<pb n="271"/>
A' flRT ufl       H     T           2SAt
learned from Minette, who, Audrig the last days of our home
life at Bouloge, had picked .p al the information she pos-
siblv could, n my interests-tht my father was the EaS*
of tIawkewood, and that his pot office was Hawkeville, in
Cornwall.
"I had'but seven shilling in my pocket, but I found my
way to the Paddington station and took a thirdoass ticket
through to Penzanee with one shilling left
"I inquired the road o Hawkeville. I could no lager
afford to ride, even third elas, so ;I set out to wlk' to
Hawkevlle. The journey took me two days. Sometimes I
got a lift in a wagon, or it would have taken me longer.
lived 'oi two pence a day, for I bought nothing but bread
and mil  and    lept under trees or hayricks."
CHAPTEB     XXtII
IN HIS PATHHER'8 HOUS2
"IT wa wam August weathe when I reached Hawke;
ville, early one moxnmg, and there I inqir 'the way to
Hawke Hall, and learned that the old earl was just dead
and buried, and tht the ygung earl, a boy of ive year, was
living there under the care of an od parson.
"This Ws. another bitter dapppintment, but not so bit-
ter as the ' t.  I set out to w   to Hawke Hall, whih I
reached in the aftroo   I undistood by what had been
said of the 'young earl, a boy of five years old' that my
father had marriedi again, and that I  d a younger brother.
How my 'hildish heart yearned toward that youner
brother    '
"As soon. as I raced the Hall I inquired of one of the
outdoor servnts, who were raking up fallen lea~s on the
lawn, if I could see his reverence, the person, who was
taking care of my brother.
"The man stared at me, and then pointed silenfly to the
servants' entrance. I went thither and rang the bell, and
asked the man who opened the door if I cola ee hie rever
ence, the pasn, who was taking care of my little brother.
.This man stared as much as the other had done, and



<pb n="272"/>
272          A TOkRTUREJ HEART
then asked me if my brother was in the parish school. l'ow, .
I had been brought up so far in France, and, though I was 
of English parentage, I did not know the rank of a parish
school-did not know it was a school for poor children. It' (
might, indeed, have been a select school for the boys of the: .
nobility, for aught I knew to the contrary then. So I said ,
I did not know whether my little brother was in the parish 
school or not; but I wanted to see the parson, who was
taking care of him.
"The man looked utterly puzzled, and went to another 
man and said:
"'Here's a little beggar inquiring after his brother, some '
other little beggar in the workus, I reckon. Go and tell 
his reverence.'
"And the second man went away, and down comes an old 
gent in a long, black coat and a round, black cap.
"He was very abrupt and peremptory with me. He
sharply demanded my business. I took off my cap and '
bowed very low, and then told him my pitiful little story--,.i
and it was a pitiful little story, gentlemen-as simply and:
as incoherently as a child of my age, frightened at the,.
presence in which he found himself, might be supposed t l
tell it.
"I told him that I was the eldest son of the earl ju
dead, and the elder brother of the little boy left behind'
that my mother and next brother had been drowned just be,
fore my father had come into his title; that I had com
down to Hawkewood Hall to see my father, and had jug
learned that he was dead; that I now wanted to see my
brother--
"But here the old man in the black gown interrupted 
and ordered me to hold my tongue. Then he beckoned i
footman and whispered to him. Then the footman beckone
me and I followed him, thinking I was going to be 
to my brother.                                   'l
"But I was taken into a small room and told to sit dowr
which I was glad enough to do, for I was dreadfully
and hungry. The footman then told me to wait there 
he should return. I waited, expecting he would fetch 
brother.
"But when he came back he only brought a tray wi l
some bread, cheese, cold beef, and a small mug of 



<pb n="273"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    27'"
of which was even more welcome than my brother could
have been, as they were all so much more desperately
needed. He set these before me, and went out and locked
the door after him.
"I was a prisoner, but that circumstance did not disturb
me; for I was in my father's house, with a good meal before
me to satisfy the cravings of my hunger.
"I ate my fill and drank all the beer, and then grew very
sleepy, and nodded in my chair; fell off on to the floor and
woke up, but felt so heavy with fatigue, drowsiness and
meat and drink that I staggered over to a horse-hair sofa,
stretched myself upon it and sank into a deep sleep. I must
have slept long enough, for the sun was low when I was
ludely awakened by the footman shaking me up.
"Hie told me the dogcart was ready, and I was to take a
ride. This news effectually aroused me. I did not know
what a dogcart was, but I fancied it was a pretty cart for
boys, dragged by trained dogs, and that I and my little
brother were to take a drive in it together.
"So I followed the footman to the yard, where, instead
of the pretty cart drawn by dogs that I had imagined, I
found a nondescript vehicle something like a gig without
a top, and instead of my little brother seated in it, I saw a
man in a suit something between a soldier's uniform and
a servant's livery.
"Before I had time to ask questions I was hustled into
the vehicle, and the man drove off. I asked him where we
were going, and he answered: 'You will see,' and discour-
aged all further attempts at conversation. We drove on for
about an hour and drew up before a double oaken and iron-
bound gate, where the man alighted and rang a bell.
"The gate was opened by a man in a gray suit, and we
drove into a flagged yard and up to a great, gloomy-looking
stone building. We drew up at a heavy oak door, where my
companion alighted and'rang again.
"The door was opened by another man in gray, and then
my companion lifted me out of the vehicle and led me into
a red brick-paved hall, furnished with deal benches along
the walls, and a desk in a corner, at which sat a fat old
man, with a white head and a black coat.
"My companion led me up to this man, and presented a



<pb n="274"/>
folded paper. The latter opened .and read it m
some of the words ina half undible tone-like thi:
"'Hum.-hum--John Gow, aged eleven--hum-h
no regular home or oecupation-hum-hum-vagr
Here, iillingsby. - ake this boy to the children's ward.'
"I was led of by the office to a brick-paved room, on
same floor, where about twenty boys in gray uniforms w
engaged in carding wool. tentlemen I 1 did not even th
suapect-I did not for man pdays understand that I
been committed to the workhouse ts a vagrant by Dr, Pa
Laude, who was in the commission of the peace. I /
committed under the name under which I had been n
at the French pensionat, and which had been afound
upon my linen in my little valise.
"That old parsn was a fool. He did not believe my pi1
ful little story, which was natural enough; but he did n
take the least trouble to investigate it, which was nrihil
wrong. So far, in ranning aay from the school in 
to get myself committed to a workhouse in Tfeland. 
had jumped from the frying pai into the fire. I was
to carding wool, and fed on oatmeal porridge on week do
with catechism and beef soup Sundays, for a change.
"I liked the workhouse even less than the sebooL  I
run away frot i the school because my childiad   beart
bheaking in lonelineis, after Winette went away torever.
had run away to find  y friendsi
"But once i the workhouse , I watched for a chanee
run away from those who seemed to e mly C.nemie 
the very first opportunity I made my escape and '
to Penzance, beggng myway and sleeping, p   ore, 
hayricka or cow saeds.-                          ^
"Oh, gentlemen, why should I prolong thli,sad st
From the day 1 ran away from school I went~pidly
bad to worse, and from'that to!the very wost. I fell am
thieves. Our first ee is to eat. I could not get or:
do not wish to enter into deails here. Enough to say t
when I ~as about fifteen years old, ant slim, fronl 
enmin.tarvatioa, I became the tool of a band ofb
sgim and lithe and sinuous as a serpent, I could e
opeings that no man and few boyq of my age ool,
ente'                                     , red.   ' .
It was I who' was sent into a bouse t~rough 'a tf
; ,, ' ?.* ..':,s'i,



<pb n="275"/>
F ' ,'            A TO       OTUBEBAD     T            2$R
e or pael to reep about in the dark and unlock doqra
or the band. We iad in the corse of a year of two, e-
eral suceessful htui , aways a phtes far apart from each
other.
"One night we were caught, tried, and convicted. It was
a very aggravated case of burglary, in which the master of
the house into which we entered was killed in the scuefle.
So the sentences were heavy. Ti'o men were executed;
three were sent to thepenal colonies for life; I, on account
of my youth, and this being my  frst offense-so far as was
known to the police-aa sent over for seven years.
"Gentlemen,. I never; kew what perdition meant until I
learned it on board of the government transport. The hor-
ror of a prison: Ahip is a reproach to Christendom I After
a voyage of eight. months-for it was a wretched old hulk
we sailed in, and an unusual allowance of bad weather at-
tended the transport-we reached Sydney, and our penal
servitude commenced.
"I was put on'the chain gang to work on the public roads,
And-I do not know how it was, but the lifers, who had
been judged so much more guilty than myself, soon got
transferred to private service and became the assigned serv-
ants of sheep farmers and others. I have no doubt that by
this time they have got their tickets of leave, or their eondi-
tional pardons, and are now flourishing as prosperous
tradesmen or farmers, while I, judged less uilty by tBhe
English court, remained in the chain gang to the end of my
term. I think it was because   cold not trn hypocrite
and hoodw~ik the chaplain
"You see, these penal settlements at the Antipodes of
civilization were first formed in a spirit of pure humiaity to
the criminal classes-to give the most guilty, far from the
scene of his crime and his reproach, an opportunity for re-
form, redemption, and restoration to society; bt; like all
other good things, their purpose has been perveted. It is
not the frank, ignorant; blundering  minal that passes
through this purgatory to the paradise of 'respetability.
No, indeed I He falls deeper and deeper into the perdition
of the penal settlements until he sinks to the hells of Mac-
quarrie Harbor or Norfolk, because, f:rsodth, degraded as
he is, he cannot become a slave and a hyparite in his spirit
end lick the shoes of his overseers or lie to the chaplain!



<pb n="276"/>
276          A TORTURED HEART
It is the guilty, treacherous, time-serving wretch who toad-;."
ies to the commandant and whines to the chaplain that,`,
passes successfully through this earthly purgatory of penal :,
service to the earthly paradise of wealth and respectability I 
I hope it will not be so in the other world, where all hearts .
are open to the eyes of the Lord and His angels I Put that,
in your pipe and smoke it, reverend sir, and understand why .
Jack Hice, with some little instinct of manli'Pss left in him,
preferred to be called a ruffian and a desperado rather than'
to know himself to be a sneak and a hypocrite 1" concluded 
the convict, with a glance at the chaplain.
The latter gentleman mused for a while, and then re-..
plied.
"There may have been hypocrites among my unhappy !t
flock. It was not for me to judge. But I know there have
also been true penitents really reformed."
"Give me something, sir, if you please, for my strength is:
going again," said the convict, turning toward the master:
of the house.
Mr. Elfinstar filled a wineglass with equal parts of beet
juice and brandy, and gave it to the convict, who, whei'.,
he had drunk it all, sighed with satisfaction and resumed
his story:
"The outdoor life, the work in the open air, the whole-
some though coarse food, and the regular hours, continue
for seven years, developed my health and muscle into-wha,
I was two months ago.
"At the end of my term of transportation I worked f
a while in the colony and then returned to England. I h
left it a slim, pale boy; I returned to it a bronzed, muscul
man, improved in physical health and strength, but by n
means in moral sense or culture.
"I naturally fell into my old courses, and within a fe
months I was concerned in another burglary. It was
bank robbery on this occasion. I escaped with a part of t
booty, but my pals were all taken. One of them tu
queen's evidence and gave away his mates, me among th
number. A warrant was made out against me, and Lond
having become too hot to hold me, I left the city and turn
my face to Cornwall.
"A mad desire had seized me to find out what had beco
of my little brother. I had by this time learned enough 



<pb n="277"/>
A TORTURED HEART 
life and law to know tht my poor mother's gypsy marriage,
though it might and did vindicate her from reproach, did
not entitle me to the succession of my father's title and
estates.
"I went down to Cornwall.all the same, however, to find
out what had become of that youngest half brother, who,
having inherited my father's earldom, was so much more
fortunate than myself, but whose face I had never seen.
" Fourteen years had elapsed since my last visit to Hawke-
wood. I was then a lad of eleven, and my brother a child
of five years. I was now a man of twenty-five, and my
brother, if still living, a youth of nineteen.
"It seemed as if I was always destined to arrive at
Hawkewood at an eventful period. On the last occasion it
was immediately after a funeral. On this occasion it was
just before a birthday festival that I reached Hawke HalL
My fortunate brother was preparing to celebrate the nine-
teenth anniversary of his birth.
"The people-villagers, tenantry, and agricultural labor-
4 ers-were all pouring toward the ornamented grounds of
Hawkewood, where the fete for the 'lower orders' was to be
held.
"I did not join them then. It was not prudent to show
myself in a crowd by daylight I Some one might recognize
me and give me up to justice. But at night I went to see
the fireworks. There was a grand ball for the gentry in the
house.
"And now, reverend sir, I come to the one act of my life
that really does trouble-my conscious, I was going to say,
if I were not sick to death of hearing that word so often
on the lips of hypocrites and time-servers. Enough. It
was the crime of Cain, and it has cursed my soul eyond
redemption I" said the convict, as a look of mental anguish
for a moment displaced the smile of mockery which was too
often on his face.
The chaplain gazed at him with eyes of tender compas-
sion, as he murmured, gently:
"Do not say that your soul is lost beyond redemption, my
brother. The mercy of the Lord is infinite."
The convict's mocking smile again displaced the look of
anguish as he replied:
"If the infinite mercy of an all-powerful God should
..  ' .  



<pb n="278"/>
78          A          ir   t i ziU        ' *
restore the dea4 $t life and wipe 60 the  of ifra
from my ,soul, I hotld beUeve on it and bow down a
worship it. Buti had better go onad tell you ow 
to commit the great crime that I never certaily intended
commit.
" 'Is thy servaut a dog that he should do this thiin
might have been as increduoaly asked.by the poo e
vict, had this deed beenpredicte to.him, as it wa by
great man of Israel.
"But I promised to tell yohow it happeed. It was
this manner: 'Opportunity,'they say, 'make the ti
Fate made the fraetrieide' While the' feworke  were
their height and the crowd was cheering outside and 
ladies and gitlepne  were looking on from the 
and verandas of the Hall, and people were pasing in
out of the house, it occurred to my mind how easy it w
be for.me, a skilled burglar, to enter that house uno
conceal myself in some of the rooms, and as 0^s   as.
should become quiet,    ro through the premises and 
priate some small portion of that wealth nearly all of 
should have been mrine had justice, insted of ,law,
the case.
"I entered the honse nobserved, and I cneeled  S
effectually in the dark closet of one of the upper
There were many dres coats and overcoats anging 
this place. I took thekey r  the utside of ti door
locked myself in the loset. There was ' small window
ventilator, high up the wall at one end that gave me p.
of air.
"I waited there long and patienty for the houisol
retire. I bad been traid i patience by my life in
penal settlement  At last I fell asleep and slept ,
was awakened by hearing voices in the ext room-
appeared to be a dressing room, adjoining, the bedroom_
whose closet I lay hidden. I saw through the keyh
gleam of red light that pierced like a dagger of fire
the solid darkness of the hiding place. 
"I listened to the voices, but could u dis/nguish no
They spoke in rather a low tone and occasionally in
in low laughter. I .nderstood by the whole tone a I
onversation, not one word of which I could ditian,"
tit .ome lark was afoot among the pieakers
,;, ..': . \:A



<pb n="279"/>
A     AUo IBSAlr i
I waited and itened for wha*eemd to me a vglong
time, and at last I head ome of them dismissed and then
all was silent, but for the little muffed sounds made by the.
occupant of the chaiber on: tiring to rest. Then the
dagger of Jire was withdrawn fom the keyhole and only: a
faint light remained as of a taper burning in the room,
"Still I waited until I thought.that all the tired house-
hold must of necessity be b rid in profound sleep, and
then I cautiously unlocked my cloet door and peeped out.
All was quiet.
"Then I silently stepped out from my hidingp place into
the room. It looked to my sight a8 if some one had been
through the place loefore me:l The bureau drawers had all
been pulled open and ransacked, and boxes and dressing
cases also stood open with their oontent in disorder.
"I heard the regular breathing of the occupant of the
room, and knew he waS aleep, but  could not see him, for
the rich crimson satin curas, fringed with gold, were
drawn closely around hit bed
:4    "I began to searh the drawers and boxes to see if my
predecessor had left anything worth taking, while I really
wondered at the *kill and disch of a brother professional
who could have made such a. lean sweep of everything in
the short time that had elaped between the falling asleep
of the occupant of the room and the entrance of myself
upon the scene.
;   "But. everything had not gone. I found a thick pocket-
book conta~inig many bank notes of high denominations. I
,  put that. into my bosom without stopping to count the
money. I also found some valuable articles of jewelry. I
i also found a case of pistols, when-
`' "'Who is that?1 camef. rom the curtained bed.
' "I snatched up a pistol and turned upon the speaker.
The bed curtains hbd been drawn aside and a w~ang man
was sitting up in bed looking anxiously out intO the half-
dark room. I seized a pistol, sprang.forward and dealt him
& heavy blow on the top of his head, meaning to tun him,
nottokillhim. He fell like a log, and.I timed to resume
my investigations. I found hut little more that I could
take away with me.
"As I was about to leare the room, however; I saw on the
.:';' ., r a mm. mr  woolen scarf that was  taialy no part
 *. ': '.
y "'^  ^                                 .    



<pb n="280"/>
280          A TORTURED HEART
of a gentleman's, or even a gentleman's servant's, wardrob
'This has been dropped by my illustrious predecessor,' E
said, and picked it up and wound it about my throat, and'
with my booty left the room, closing the door after me.
"When I found my way out of the house, which I did.
without difficulty, for I was skilled in such performances,:
day was dawning.
"I walked rapidly to the coast, being determined to get'
away to France in some fishing smack if possible.
"I was lucky. I found a fisherman getting ready to sail 
for the deep sea fishing. I told him I would give him ten,
pounds to take me across the Channel. The job would takei
him but a few days, and would pay him more than a month's
fishing.
"But the rogue was sharp, and declined my first offer.
I doubled my bid, and he accepted. All this time he ad-.
dressed me as Ham Gow. I had learned in the course of
my checkered career the wisdom of holding my tongue. I
let him Ham Gow me uncontradicted to the end of the'
voyage. One day he picked up the old red woolen scarf
that I had brought away. 
"'Ay,' he said, 'this will be Young Nan's work. I sai
her when she was a knitting of it, and here be the two let
ters that stand for your name, H. and G., knitted into t
work. She is a skillful woman with the needle, is ti
mother o' yourn.' I said: 'Yes, she is.' And when thi
fishermen landed me at St. Rosalie on the coast of France
I purposely left the scarf in the little cuddy hole he call
the cabin of his boat. I paid him the stipulated twent
pounds. He told me that he thought it was a fine th
to have made a fortune in the gold fields of Australia as
had done and to be able to throw around money as I w
doing.
I did not intend to remain at St. Rosalie. That sa
day I walked to Dieppe and took steerage in a steam!
bound for England. And the first thing that met me
landing on my native shore was the placard, everyw
pasted up, offering a reward for the apprehension of H
Gow and Henri Delaplaine, charged with the murder 
Horace, Earl of Hawkewood, on the morning of Septem
the 2d, 18-.                                     !
"This was the first intelligence I received that I
~' ?;t



<pb n="281"/>
A  TORTUBEiD "H     AlT    ,      S8T
killed a.man, whom I only had intended to stun, and that
the man was my own brother. I was a fratricide. The
awse of Cain was upon mel"
CHAPTEB XXIX
WHUIL LIFB, HOPI
THB wretched man, overwhelmed by the memory of his
fratricidal murder, unintentional though it had been, cov-
ered his haggard face with his horny hands and relapsed
into silence that continued for a few moments.
Then, with a deep sigh that seemed to rend his bosom, he
continued:
"Yes, I felt that the cure of Cain wasupo me. I had
killed the young brother whom X had never seen, but whom
in my heart I had loved and longed to look upon, from the
first hour that I had heard of his existence. I fell into a
state of despair, of desperation i
"I hardly cared now what became of me. I wandered
!listlessly toward London, spending a shilling now and then
for a meal or a lodging. In the course of my tramp I came
upon a gypsy encampment. They were of the great Gow
tribe to whick my mother had been affiliated.
"I inquired if there were any among them who rtnem'e
bered Radiance Gow, the adopted child of their queen  I
found there were many; for i   mother had been living
she would have been but thirt    ars old. I told them
that I was her son; and in the .yn    y state and the
soreness of my heart I told th nM
"They received me very kind'y aih   .em; said that
they would both shelter and defend me; t4 no one should
take me out of their hands.
'That was a vain boast, gentlemen! I had nt been two
days in the gypsy camp before I was arrested by a party of
euniopnists. The gypsies resisted; but a posse comitatus
wa* quickly raised, and I was carried off in triumph. I was
'rai,_ ,not for myself however, or for my share in the rob-
biig:of the bank, though there was a warrant out against
im> ;ithat charge. No I but I was takn    again for Ham
.                                                .~~~~~~~aa



<pb n="282"/>
Gow, the; aeused nurderer of the Earl of law
tbis Ham Gow, who boW e my owan ;u nd' my 
imagel And when I s'aw the peter with the d     pti
of the man who was chared with the earl's miurder,'  d i^
whomn the reward was offered; 1 no longer wo ed ha
had been taken for him ^..
"I was lodged in thfe nearest police station hose 
night and taken before & magistrate the next morning. 
lo and behold 1 there were poliee officeri and dletectivs i
at once boldly denid that I was Ham GOw,; howier 
I resembled the lawkeville trap, or that 1    ot:  : 
ever have been anybowi  else btt    f, Jai 
retirned convict au4 burglar, who  a bdly; wabtd 
hiN share int- ie robbersy gi  the. o d. oad 0dil 
"So I was carried off toLondon instead of 't Baw
aad thrown ilto Newgae too awlit.' my tri.  1. wa, 
arraigned at the Old Bailey, trie, coinicted, aad- a.  i
anj old oeffender-I was Denteced s' heavily as the 
of the lawr would allow.. X a.m  here for t urtee. yep '
have served out Pomething mor than a e  of thi
11 broke my chains, hoping to make ooi]y e   . I a
failed and I have been reaptured. ibhve tid m  s  y tu_
two 'eawons: fttir, :deiverys bo  , of it ideOs 
and secondly, to vixdicate .a iinnqce.  myn. '-my  lm
lam Gow, whob. igt ' therw. "tB for my '"ie. 
niot epect to be saved, I do a t  wope for ,the , a don ,i
ILnrd    look.to pss thrugh m       e    mug i ie e
stage of existence, before my 'ol can be edeePnd,: i
can ever be redeemec..  I liavgdpe."
The convict ceased to speak and tumhed his fei to
wall.
"I thought you' said yoan  rer not a Roman Ca   i
said the chaplain. 
I am not. I am nothing," replied the man.   '.'.
'But you alluded to-purgatory."
"That was.all outf d my own head."
"Mv poor friend, let me pray with you," plead 
chaplain.  ,                . '. 
"No, not now. It is no use  I amot fit  If IAt. 
killed my brother, I might pray; but asa have, I
There '. .                          , 
,''';A"I



<pb n="283"/>
i'  ' .  ' , ",  '     * i       *.'  ,(  . i  *','*  ' ,  '.* .  ' ,  ' r 
'  , my poor fri ed,m  d ot m  t(t{ o deaphi of  e,
Iord's mercy is the most fatalf ," a aid f  pla 
"I don't espi r of the il  t iercy;  I depair if iiy'
oef, Paron I you ;eve* keid7jp ur own brothpr 1   a
do you know about itP 
"Let me pray wi  you,Hi.ee"
, "I can't I tel you' 
"Oh, do   t ay you .cant P " leaded i     aplain.
"I won't, the   Will tit ht lt.ydOu better ?' surlily de-
manded the. oic t.      ,
"A    U~I     we do wth tI w  w do wh i   inqired ,tihe
chaplain, in a~ l. ie ad  ith a dep a  figh.
Old Mr. EKfi"h   jtario  &iBhon<hk hi head.
But here the: tr.nger gueet, Mr. Pilato :,Gower; who
had been a silent but' deeply interested spectator and' lis-
tener, suddenly mrup~iaed 'i.twholeftpart  by aying:
"Geentleien, if you ,will eaie  e ^aloe with this man for
a few minlute, "I thik I oan bring' him to' be tter st* tof
mfind." 
The host dad the chaplain looked at the epeaker in silent
wonder and inreduity.
"Will you peaiit me to makb the trial?" he inquir1i,
with a  ave smile.
"Yesa-e us do so," .add Mr. Elhintar, lightly touhing
the chapl.ii on the sholder, and rising to lead the way
from the   . 
Mr. Herti i aroee aad feolowd his host outf loing th
door behind- i 
Hamilton O.er fo.!nd " nit'elf alone with I.it.
This ya     tranger hadbeen the most deeply inteste
of the whole r   in the sin thar story told by the convict.
He had lit    to  in amaanent, humiliation ' aid a ds.
perate efforat incredulity; fot there is sometin'g in the
truth that will force itself upon the oonzvialoatf o etpen
the most reluant of truthful hearers.
Thus   amilton Gowr-as he choes t*o al' : ifli,-" B
compelled aainst his 'ill, and with the dee" t : ""motifia-
tion and distress, to believe 'the dying opti$W aty. 
Now finding him~elf alone with this  i"ieble telon,
wh we fae awe as till mturned .ulldly to the i, he beat over
him and gently inquired:



<pb n="284"/>
28*       A TORADUiEX BEAKRT 
"Is it the death of your brother that weighs heaviest cit
your conscience ?" 
The convict half tmred his head and favored the speake
with a glance of pity and' contempt from the corner of bi
glittering black eye, before he replied:
"If you were not a born idiot you would not ask such  i
foolish question! But, after all, how should you know?
Nobody can ever know the weight of a sin but he who feelt
it lying on his heart I And you never killed your brother 1"'3
"How should you know what I have done, if you do not'
know my past life ? If I have not killed my brother I has,!
come as near as possible to doing so," said the young
stranger, in a voice of deep sorrow.
"What is that you say?" inquired the convict, becoming
interested at last.
"I say that I must have killed my brother  But listeni'
As sure as there is a Heaven above us, you never killed
yours 1" said the young man, solemnly.
"There I thought you were qn iaiot, and now I know it
Give me some mnire of that brandy and stuff, or I shall gi
up the ghost in ten minutes. Don't you know it is not
but that brandy and stuff that keeps me out of fire
brimstone?" demanded the convict.
The young gentleman filled a wineglass with equal 
of "brandy" and "stuff,7 as he had seen his host p.
it from the two bottles on the stand, and gave it to
sinking man, who swallowed'the mixture with some
culty, and then demanded: 
"What did you mean by calling Heaven to witness ih
hadn't made an pnd of my brother?"
"I meant tha: you had not killed your brother, 
your brother is not dead," gravely replied Haml'to,;g
:  '. ase put the empty glass on the stand.*
,"^ ': .   ij g  't know what you are talking albout. ^'
' ','/.-  l' .wkewood was my brother. He was fo
t^ .?.?l?(:~i't lwas my hand that dealth the blow," sail
,'::. ' ' , te 0of dogged despair. 
.'. '   Yo ait'pilstaken," said the young gentleman, ca
'Y:  v oYou are mad l" replied the conviet contemptuo
"The young Earl of Hawkewood is alive and we^,'?
,Mr.o. Gower.                      '         .;;?
'':; ': i,,"



<pb n="285"/>
A. TOJLT~J t6D       A i W
"I know the present one, who succeded the murded
man, is."             '               ,
"Lewis Manto ,is nt the earl, beause Herame eHawke
Earl of Hawkewood, still lives," quietly persistethe young
gentleman.
"Oh I dare say, Charles the First, King, f Fnglad, sti
reigns," sneered the convict.
"You mock me; but my words are true, and I will prova
them true for your oomfort; and now I tell you that you not '
only never killed the Earl of Hawkewood, but that nobody
else ever killed him. You never even struck him. You
never had a chance to strike him. He was far away from
Hawkewood on the morning after his birthnight ball," said
the young gentleman, quietly.
The convict regarded the.speaker with a look of real com-
miseration.
"Poor natural I" he murmured, under his breath. Then:
"Look here, mate," he said. "Do your friends-allow you
to go at large without a keeper? It is very wrong if they
do. You're far gone-far gone  I Iwonder if I could beat
any sense in your head on this subject? Ill try. Listen,
now: Don't you know that when the Earl of Hawkewood
was found murdered in his bed there was a post-mortem
examination of the body, and a coroner's inquest, and a Yetr
diet of willful murder (against the wrong parties, of
course), and that the whole country rang with the news of
the young Earl of Hawkewood's murder?"
"Oh, yes; I know all that l
"How, then, do you say the earl is still alive and well?'
"Because it is true."
"How can it be true?"
"Listen: A body closely resembling thit of the Earl of
Hawkewood was found in his bed, in a state of apparent
death. It was supericially examined by a physican, but
no dissection was attempted, because the wound sad to
have caused death was on the top of the head. It was sat
upon by a coroner's jury composed of country bumpkins as
stupid as their own oxen, and a set of false conolusisRn were
drawn from false premises from beginning to end.'
"What are you driving at, anyhow?" demwadi Hice, or
Gow, in an irritable tone.
"Attend to me and you will see. I think that you can



<pb n="286"/>
286          A TORTURED HEART
appreciate the truth when you hear it. Your own strange
story which you tell, yet cannot prove, bears an impress of 
truth upon it which has convinced me. The story that I
am about to tell you will, I hope, bear such an impress of
truth as to convince you." 
"Go ahead," said the convict, in a faint voice, "and I
will rest while I am listening to you."
"You saw the Rev. Dr. Paul Laude when you first visited
Hawke Hall, and you must have been overawed by the
severe sternness of the man."
"Um-m-e," assented the convict, with a groan.
"Think, then, what must have been the condition of a 
boy, without father or mother, sister, brother, or companion, '
left to the sole guardianship and tutelage of such an austere 
martinet-to be under the control of his eye, or his pres- 
ence, day and night, sleeping or walking, eating or drinking, 
studying or idling, without any intermission for years and .
years "                                                :
"Um-m-e I Poor brother!"
"This treatment made almost a melancholy maniac of the e
boy; would have quite done so but that he found in the 4i
parish school-which he visited in company with his aus-':
tere tutor-a lad two or three years older than himself, to .'
whom he felt so powerfully attracted that he began to use {!
his study-stultified wits to devise ways and means of making.
this lad's acquaintance, and he succeeded. The name of.i
this parish schoolboy was Ham Gow."                   !
"Ah !" exclaimed the wounded man, with a sudden access :
of interest.
"He was the reputed grandson of an old woman named '.-
Nan Crook, who lived in the ground room of an old ruined 'i
watch tower, at Demondike, near the coast, but on the 
young earl's estate, and who made her living by fortune :i
telling, quack doctoring, and other irregular, if not illegal, 
methods."
"Um-m-e," commented the wounded man. 
"The young earl used to steal out from the Hall to meet 
and play with his only companion, while his tutor was f;
taking his afternoon nap, which always happened about the
hour that the parish school was dismissed. This lad, Ham  '
Gow, bore so remarkable a resemblance to the boy earl that
they must have been perfect counterparts but for the ternm
is4



<pb n="287"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   287
porary and passing difference in height and in dress. Ham
Gow was taller and more plainly clothed than Horace
Hawke. But so striking was the likeness that the impudent
gossips of the neighborhood did not hesitate to hint that
they were half brothers."
"Oh-h-h !" murmured the convict.
"I must not dwell too long upon this subject. Enough to
say that all the enjoyment that fell to the little lord's life
came out of his companionship with poor Ham Gow, until.
he envied the lot of the young peasant."
"Shouldn't wonder," came in muffled tones from the
black head half buried in the pillows.
"A warm attachment was formed between the boys, which
continued for years, when it was discovered by the severe
tutor, who threatened the young peasant with the house of
correction and hurried the young earl off to Eton, where,
instead of leaving him to rough it and be happy with the
other noble young rowdies, he remained and mounted guard
over the pupil's manners and morals."
"Say !" growled the convict, "can't you get along a little
faster? I want to know about that murder, or no murder."
"You are right, I will. Well, as it had been at Hawke
Hall, so it was at Eton, and as at Eton, so afterward at
Oxford. The young man had no more freedom than the
child had; indeed, he had less; not a day, not an hour had
he any relief from the galling surveillance and constant
criticism that grew more oppressive and intolerable as the
years went on, until his health and spirits, his body and
mind broke down under the ordeal. And now we come to
the night of the so-called homicide at Hawke Hall."
"Yes, tell me about that," said Gow, alias Hice.
"The young Lord Hawkewood had returned from Oxford
to Hawke Hall, to spend the midsummer vacation-dra.
gooned as usual by his austere tutor. But here his emaci-
ated form, his pale and hollow cheeks, and his lack-luster
eyes, languid walk and his lethargic manner shocked the
household at the Hall, and engaged the anxious attention
of the family physician, who had attended Horace Hawke
from his childhood. This Dr. Ellis investigated the cause
of general failure of health, and when he found it, rem-
onstrated strongly with the tutor, and insisted on a total



<pb n="288"/>
288          A TORTURED HEART
change of habits as absolutely necessary for the restoration
of the young earl's health."
"To have swopped places with his brother out hpe in the
penal settlements and taken a turn at breaking stones on
the highway with the chain gang," chuckled the convict, in
a low and feeble laugh.
"Yes, that might have accomplished the object," said the
young gentleman, in an equable tone.
"Well, go on. I thought you said you had got down to
the night of the murder," mumbled the man.
"So I have! Well, the sapient tutor, alarmed at last
for his pupil's state, determined to seize the opportunity
afforded by the nineteenth anniversary of the young lord's
birthday to give a grand fete in the grounds to all the vil-
lagers, tenantry and laborers on the estate, and a ball in
the evening to all the nobility and gentry of the neighbor-
hood-as if the gayety of one day and night could cure the
evils caused by long years of an unnatural asceticism and
an apathetic existence."
"As if !" assented the wounded man.
"The young earl cared then for none of these things, and
on the day of the fete, when the grounds were filled with
people in their holiday clothes and highest spirits, the young
earl walked among them like a forlorn ghost, until-oh!
joyful sight-he came suddenly upon the free and gay com-
panion of his boyhood, Ham Gow, who had just returned
from a vagabond tour around the world, and last of all from
the gold fields of Australia! The very atmosphere of the
tramp was to the earl as the breath of life !"
"Ah-h!" breathed the convict, with full appreciation of
this statement.
"The two young men were more alike in personal appear-
ance than ever, except, of course, in toilet. They were now
of the same height and size, as well as of the same features
and complexion. If the young earl was emaciated from
melancholy, the tramp was gaunt from continuous walking.
The earl envied the tramp his free and joyous life, more
than he had ever done before."
"Should think so," muttered the convict.
"He could not then give more tian a few moments to his
old playmate, for he was making a sort of 'duty' tour among
his tenantry and laborers who were scattered over the



<pb n="289"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    289
grounds, but he made an appointment with the tramp to
come to his chamber that night after the guests should have
left the Hall and all the household should have retired. He
also arranged that his valet, Henri Delaplaine, should be
on the watch to admit Ham Gow and conduct him to his
room."
"Ah ! here it comes!" murmured the convict.
"At the appointed time the earl entered his bedchamber
and was soon followed by the valet, introducing the tramp.
And now was carried into effect a little comedy that had
been buzzing through the young earl's brain ever since his
sudden meeting with the 'gay and happy' tramp."
"That was what I heard going on while I was hidden
in the closet. I knew from the tone of the voice and laugh-
ter that some lark was afoot, though I couldn't hear a word
to tell me what it was," said Hice.
"The little comedy, which came very near turning into a
tragedy, was simply this: that the young earl and the young
vagrant, who, except in their toilets, were such counterparts
of each other, should change characters for a time. Ham
Gow, with the assistance of the valet, Delaplaine, was
washed, shaved clean, with the exception of a mustache like
the earl's that was to be left upon his upper lip, had his hair
trimmed exactly like the earl's, his hands and his face whit-
ened, was put into a suit of the earl's fine underclothes, and
got to bed, to personate the earl; while young Lord Hawke-
wood had his pale face stained with a light decoction of red
oak bark to give it the tanned hue of the tramp's complex-
ion, put on a black wig and false black beard supplied from
a masquerading costume of the good Mr. Delaplaine, got
into the tramp's clothes, and, with all the money and jewels
he had at hand and a few changes of clothes in a valise,
walked out of the Hall, attended by Delaplaine, to begin to
lead a tramp's free and joyous life. Now, do you begin to
see light?"
"Oh, yes, it was Ham Gow I killed, and not my brother,
thank Heaven !" breathed the convict.
"You killed no one, thank Heaven! Your hands and
your conscience are free from blood guiltiness, so far as
that night's doings were concerned. And vou did not intend
to kill your brother, or anyone, you said."



<pb n="290"/>
290          A TORTURED HEART
"No, I did not think of my brother at all. And I only
meant to stun the man to keep him from giving the alarm."
"And you did only stun the man by that blow you dealt
him on the top of his head; but you stunned him so effectu-
ally that he remained perfectly unconscious for hours and
was apparently dead when discovered in the morning. The
village doctor pronounced him dead and certified that death
was caused by that wound upon the top of his head; an
autopsy was not deemed necessary."
"That would ha' finished him," put in the convict.
"Most certainly. But as the doctor did not finish the
work begun by you, it remains unfinished to this day. The
tramp-got up to personate the earl, and being more per-
fectly like the earl, since loss of blood had given a real pal-
lor and refinement to his complexion, while his immobility
and unconsciousness prevented him from betraying himself
by word or manner-partially recovered consciousness while
lying on the table in the justice room, where the inquest
was held upon his body, received a confused idea of what
was going on, and relapsed into insensibility again. When
once more he came to himself, he found the room in which
he lay locked up and deserted -"
"Say!" interrupted the convict, "how did you find out
all this?"
"From Gow himself; but let me go on. When the tramp
found himself alone under such unpleasant circumstances,
his first mental movement was an effort to remember and
understand how he came there. He was enabled to recall
the events of the preceding night and the part of the earl
that he had undertaken to play, and which he had not
played for two hours before he was knocked on the head by
a blow that deprived him of consciousness. These recollec-
tions enabled him to comprehend his situation. He knew
that he had been laid out as dead and that a coroner's in-
quest had sat upon his 'body.' He now feared that if he
should relapse into insensibility again they might bury him!
And so he resolved that he would try to get up and run
away."
"And small blame to him," muttered the convict.
"He rolled over and let himself drop on the floor. The
shock of the fall set his half stagnant blood into circula-
tion. By the dim light in the room he saw some decanters



<pb n="291"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    291
on a side table. He crawled to the place, struggled upon
his knees, and got a bottle of brandy and took a drink."
"Ah !" said the wounded man, with a sympathetic gusto,
"that set him up."
"Yes, it did, and this reminds me that you need setting
up. You must take a little more of the beef juice and
brandy," said Mr. Hamilton Gower, preparing the mixture,
which he duly administered.
"And so," continued the narrator, "feeling strengthened
by the stimulant, the tramp struggled to his feet and tot,
tered to one of the windows that opened down to the floor
and out upon the lawn, unfastened the shutters and walked
forth into the grounds, all in his underclothes, just as he
had been lifted out of bed. It was a cool but not a cold
morning, that second day of September, and the tramp was
so much further revived by the freshness of the air that he
walked on through that early dawn, stopping to rest when-
ever he required to do so, until at length he reached the
Ruined Tower where his grandmother lived."
"Good for him !" said the wounded man.
"But there he gave out and fell like a log at the feet of
the old woman. They had scarcely recognized him under
his disguise before a man came in and told them that Ham
Gow was charged with the murder of the Earl of Hawke-
wood, and that they had better lose no time in hiding him,
as the Ruined Tower would be one of the first places to be
searched by the police."
"Who are sure to be harkened on to a wrong scent by
your coroners' juries, and then blamed for not finding," put
in Hice.
"Well, the two women took Ham to a secret hiding place,
forever inaccessible to search, and there they nursed him
through the severe illness that succeeded to his cracked
skull. Meanwhile a great row was raised all through the
country about the theft of the young earl's body, and fabu-
lous sums were offered for its recovery. Its disappearance,
I hear, has subsided into the chronic mystery of that neigh-
borhood."
A low laugh from Hice interrupted the narrator for a
moment.
"Meanwhile Ham Gow recovered, so changed by the loss
of his blood and the loss of his hair and beard from what



<pb n="292"/>
292          A TORTURED HEART
he had been, and so opposite in appearance to the printed
description of his person in the placards that offered a re-
ward for his apprehension, that he walked all the way from
Hawkeville to London unrecognized, except by one man,   
the.village doctor, who had years before that attended him 
through a spell of illness, during which, as a beardless boy  :'
with short hair and a pale face, he had looked as he looked 
on the first morning of his flight, and so the doctor had been 
enabled to recognize him."                               ;
"These doctors are the dickens," said Hice, sententiously.
"Ham Gow got away from this one, however, and he was
only once more in peril. It was when he heard that another
man, who closely resembled the printed description of him-
self, had been arrested in his place, and was really likely to
suffer in his stead. Then, indeed, he was prompted to give
himself up and run the risk of hanging for a man who was
alive and well, but whom he could not prove to be so, be- 
cause he was ignorant of his whereabouts, or that of the 
valet, Delaplaine, who was the only other person in their
confidence. But just as the poor tramp had made up his 
mind to sacrifice himself, he learned that the man arrested
as Ham Gow had been identified as Jack Hice, the returned ,
convict." 
"That was myself, you know," said the wounded man. 
"Of course. So Ham Gow made good his escape to Aus-
tralia. He is now in the gold fields of Victoria, where I 
parted with him more than a year ago, and from where I
got news of him scarcely a month since." 
"Yes; but that eccentric young Earl of Hawkewood,      ?
where is he?" inquired Hice, fixing his deep and burning
black eyes upon the narrator. 
"He-that admirable young gentleman !-is also out here
in these colonies." 
"How do you know?"
"Because I came out on the same ship with him, and trav- 
eled all over Australia with him. I was traveling in his  ;
company when I met Ham Gow in the gold fields." 
"Ah !" said the convict, thoughtfully considering the case.
"Perhaps you are Mr. Delaplaine, his lordship's valet." 
"No, not quite that; but I am a very intimate friend of
the excellent young nobleman." 
"He is a good fellow, is he?" inquired Hice.



<pb n="293"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   293
"Oh, admirable " replied Mr. Hamilton Gower, with a
smile.
"Well, then, if you are not his lordship's valet, who are
you?" inquired Hice, with a suspicious glance.
"I have told you. I am the most intimate friend of that
incomparable young man."
"But your name?"
"Hamilton Gower, at your service!"
"That sounds like an elongation of Ham Gow; or rather,
Ham Gow sounds like an abbreviation of Hamilton Gower.
It is deuced queer, taken all together."
"Suppose you do not trouble your head about it. Sup-
pose you try to compose yourself to sleep. It strikes me that
you have talked entirely too much already for a man in
your condition."
"Oh! Mr. Hamilton Gower-since that is your name-
you have given me new life in the assurance that I am not
a fratricide, as the Lord knows I never intended to be.
Your words have done my body more good than all the
brandy and stuff, and my soul more good than all the par-
son's preaching!" said the man.
"I am glad to hear it. You do not feel now as if you
were going to die?"
"No, no!"
"And you will listen to the chaplain, and let him pray
with you when he comes?"
"Yes, yes."
"Just now you must go to sleep, all the same. I shall
leave you, and send Mrs. Annis to sit by you. Her presence
will not disturb you," said the young gentleman.
And he arose and left the room.
CHAPTER XXX
MERCY
HE had told the wretched convict enough to ease the
guilty conscience by relieving it of the supposed crime of
fratricide; but he had not given the man his full confidence.
He reserved that for the present. If Hice were to recover,
he would never tell him more than he had already told;
but if Hice were going to die, he would confide a certain
secret to him.



<pb n="294"/>
294          A TORTURED HEART
With these thoughts he joined his host and the chaplain
in the sitting room, where he said:
"If you are to spend the day, I think Hice will see you
and listen to your counsels in a better spirit than he has
hitherto shown, Mr. Heron."
"He is to dine and spend the night with us," put in
Mr. Elfinstar.
"I am happy to hear of the man's improved mind, and
curious to know by what means you brought it about. I
will go to him now," said the chaplain, rising.
"No, not now, I think, sir. Hice has been more excited
and fatigued than is good for any man in his condition. I
left him trying to sleep," said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Very well, then; when he wakes up and has taken some
refreshment I will attend him," replied Mr. Heron.
The early dinner was soon announced, and the three gen-
tlemen adjourned to the dining room, where they were
joined by Seraph, to whom Mr. Elfinstar introduced Mr.
Heron.
The young lady received the chaplain with graceful cour-
tesy, and then went on to inquire after the condition of the
wounded man.
"I think his symptoms much more favorable, Miss Elfin-
star," replied the young gentleman.
"But are you a competent judge of the case? Have you
any medical or surgical knowledge or experience, young
sir?" inquired the chaplain, with the "privilege of the
clergy."
Mr. Hamilton Gower smiled and said:
"Fifteen months of roughing it in the colonies has
brought me to some acquaintance with wounds and wounded
men. If this man had been shot through any vital organ
his fate would have been decided before this. The bullet
passed through the middle of his body, and, as sometimes
happens, without piercing a vital organ. I may venture
to say more-the man will recover. His previous life in
the open air and his semi-starvation, together, have so puri-
fled and thinned his blood as to prevent internal inflam-
mation. You will see to-morrow when the surgeon comes
that he will confirm my opinion."
"Thank Heaven !" fervently breathed Seraph.
"Amen !" reverently responded Hamilton Gower.



<pb n="295"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    295
They were by this time seated around the table and the
soup was served.
"I hope the surgeon will give him a long time to re-
cover, before he is taken back to the chain gang," said
Seraph, with a shudder.
"The man impresses me more favorably since I heard his
confession. I shall use influence with the commandant to
get him assigned to private service, either in the town or
on some sheep farm-that is, should he recover," said the
chaplain.
"Oh, I hope and trust you will, Mr. Heron," said Seraph,
fervently.
The chaplain looked at the girl with much interest. In
the many years that he had held his office as chaplain to
convicts, he had never seen anyone show such a depth of
tender compassion for those wretched outcasts as this fragile
girl felt for the ruffian who had received his wound, if he
had not met his death, while making a brutal assault upon
herself. This heavenly pity, that moved the admiration of
the chaplain, won the love of Hamilton Gower.
After dinner the party separated. The clnaplain went
into the room of the wounded man, whom he found awake
and partaking of a bowl of milk porridge that had been
brought him by Mrs. Annis.
The chaplain sat down quietly, told Hice that he was glad
to see him so much better, and then waited until the man
had finished his repast, and the housekeeper had taken the
empty bowl and left the room.
Then the chaplain closed the door and locked it, and
seated himself beside the bed.
In the meantime, outside of that sick chamber, old Mr.
Elfinstar had retired to the sitting room and had dropped
into his easy-chair, exactly where we first found him, and
had fallen into his after-dinner doze.
The two young people, left to themselves, strolled out
into the beautiful grounds, where they remained until sum-
moned to the house by the tea bell.
Around the pleasant tea table the little party of four
assembled again.
Upon Seraph's inquiry into the state of the wounded man,
the chaplain said, with a smile:
"I may report of Hice's spiritual condition, as my friend



<pb n="296"/>
296          A TORTURED HEART
here reported of his material one-the symptoms are more
favorable than they were."
"Thank Heaven!" again responded Seraph.
After tea, the four persons, whom we may now call the
four friends, met in the parlor and spent the evening in
playing a quiet game of whist. which old Mr. Elfinstar
greatly enjoyed, declaring that for want of partners he had
not had a game since he left the old country.
They kept early hours at the Mountain Hermitage, and
after family prayers at ten they separated and retired to
rest.
Soon after breakfast the next morning the surgeon
reached the Hermitage, and went immediately to his pa-
tient, whom he found so much better that he made these
remarks to his host:
"When a bullet passes quite through the middle of a
man's body from front to back the chances are about a
thousand to one that he is mortally wounded. This man
has been favored by the thousandth chance, and he will
recover."
This report gave great satisfaction to everyone in the
house.
But the chaplain drew the surgeon apart for a little pri-
vate conversation, and said to him:
"In the name of humanity, I implore you to give this
man as long a time for convalescence as you possibly can
consistently with your duty."
"I would gladly do this, Mr. Heron, but you know Hice
is one of the most desperate criminals in the settlement,"
replied the surgeon.
"You have used the right word-'desperate.' 'His hand
against every man' because 'every man's hand is against
him.' I have a better opinion of him since I have heard his
confession."
"Exactly, Mr. Heron. You are always imposed upon by
these hypocrites," said the surgeon.
"I have not been imposed upon by this man; for hypo-
crite he certainly is not! Call him ruffian, desperado, or
anything you like, except that, for if he had been a hypo-
crite his condition would have been much improved. He
would have imposed on us all, as like as not, and got his\
ticket of leave by this time," said the chaplain.



<pb n="297"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   297
"And because this fellow is so atrocious a criminal that
he cannot even feign repentance, you therefore wish to have
some favor shown him," said the surgeon.
"No, not so; you are really unjust to the man, Boggs..
He is not 'an atrocious criminal,' as you have called him.
He has never committed an atrocious crime. He is what
you just called him, 'a desperate criminal'-rendered des-
perate by circumstances, provocations, temptation, that I
wish to ameliorate. I want to try an experiment with the
man, and I want you to help me."
"Well, what do you want me to do, then?"
"In the first place, give the man as long a convalescence
here as you possibly can. Do not report him fit for removal
until he shall have got, not only well, but strong."
"I can do that without any transgression of duty."
"Of course, I knew you could, or I should not have
asked it."
"Well, what next?"
"Help me to prevent him from being sent back to the
chain gang. Join me in recommending him to be assigned
to private service," said the chaplain.
"But who could you get to take such a desperate charac-
ter into his service?" incredulously inquired the surgeon.
"Our host," answered the chaplain.
"What! Have you asked him ?" inquired the surgeon, in
surprise.
"No, for I did not think-that is, I did not know, that I
could get you to come into my plans; but now I shall speak
to Mr. Elfinstar, and I feel sure that his noble spirit will
lead him to take this poor pariah."
"What! After the ruffian's brutal assault upon his
daughter ?"
"Yes, and if he hesitated his daughter would be the first
to plead for the poor wretch."
"Well, such being the case, I will certainly go heart and
hand with you in your efforts to redeem John Hice," said
the surgeon.
The interview ended here.
The two gentlemen went into the drawing room to see
their host and hostess, and bid them adieu before leaving
the Hermitage, for the chaplain had determined to return
to town in company with the surgeon.



<pb n="298"/>
298          A TORTURED HEART
But they found a collation laid out by the thoughtful
hospitality of Mr. Elfinstar, who invited them to sit down
and partake of it while their horses were being fed and wa-
tered.
They thanked their host and sat down with him and with
his daughter to the table; and there the chaplain made his
proposition in John Hice's favor.
CHAPTER XXXI
THE CHAPLAIN'S SUCCESS
"TAKE the convict Hice into my service," murmured old
Mr. Elfinstar, in a very thoughtful tone.
"I think, if you should be so disposed, you may do it
with perfect safety," said the chaplain.
"I do not wish to urge the matter upon you, sir, but if
you should want an outdoor servant, I believe you may take
this man without risk," added the surgeon.
"I agree with these gentlemen. From my observation of
the man, I see, though he has been brutal enough under
exasperation, he is not treacherous; he will not rob the
house that shelters him, or hurt the hand that feeds him,"
added Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Dear father! Give this poor soul a chance to save him-
self! Why do you hesitate?" pleaded Seraph Elfinstar.
"I do so only for your sake, my child," gently answered
the old master of the house.
"Then, for my sake, hesitate no longer, my dear father.
Take Hice as your assigned servant. I am not in the least
afraid of him. He will never hurt me," pleaded the gentle
girl.
"But, gentlemen," said Mr. Elfinstar, turning to his
guests, "is it ascertained whether the authorities will permit
this man, with his terrible record, to be assigned to private
service ?"
"The authorities will almost always do so when an offer
is made for the man, unless he be a capital criminal, subject
to the extreme penalty of the law. In this case the offer
should come from yourself, and Dr. Bogs and myself
will recommend its acceptance in favor of John Hice," said
Mr. Heron.



<pb n="299"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    299
"So, if you do want additional service outdoors, it would
be a charity to take Hice."
"I do not particularly want a new servant; but I dare say
my gardener can find employment for another. I will make
a formal application for Hice," concluded Mr. Elfinstar.
"Oh, thank you, dear father! You have made me so
glad," said Seraph.
But she spoke gravely and without the smile that should
have accompanied such words. Young, gentle, compas-
sionate as she was, no smile had ever been seen on Seraph
Elfinstar's face, and no vestige of color on her white checks.
Hamilton Gower, who watched her closely, wondered why
this should be so.
Young and beautiful as she was, the girl impressed him
as one who had passed through some terrible ordeal, some
blasting sorrow! The more he studied Seraph the deeper
this impression became.
What had she endured to send the color forever away
from her fair cheeks, the smile forever away from her
lovely lips?
He was thinking so deeply of the girl now that he scarcely
heard the words of the chaplain in response to Mr. Elfin-
star's decision. Mr. Heron, however, was saying, with some
emotion:
"I believe, sir, that by this act of charity you will save
a soul alive!"
"Heaven grant it !" exclaimed the old gentleman, as they
all arose from their seats at the table.
"And now," he continued, "if you can wait a little, I
will step into the library and write out my application. It
will not take me ten minutes."
The surgeon and the chaplain bowed and began to walk
up and down the hall while waiting for the aged master of
the Hermitage to return with his written application.
Hamilton Gower stood with Seraph Elfinstar out on the
front piazza.
He was watching her fair, colorless face and tender blue
eyes.
"How is it that you have so much pity for, and so little
fear of, that ruffian who assaulted you?" he inquired, in a
grave and gentle tone.
"I do not quite know. I never thought about it," she



<pb n="300"/>
800          A TORTURED HEART
answered, slowly. Then, with more quickness: "He is to
be pitied, is he not ? And he is not now to be feared, is he ?"
"In his present condition; but when he recovers health
and strength and has the freedom of your grounds, where
you might encounter him in your walks every day?" in-
quired the young gentleman.
"Still he would be an object of compassion rather than
of terror. The poor slave of the crown would never now
hurt me, I know."
"How do you know this, my dear Miss Elfinstar?"        i
"Because we have taken him in and nursed him, and I
read in the poor convict's eyes that he is a man and not a
creature lower than the brutes; for even brutes are infln-
enced by kind treatment."
"You are right, Miss Elfinstar. Hice will never harm 
you."
"No, I feel sure he will not."
"And Hice will not be the only convict servant you have,  i
I think. The chaplain informs me that you have a young
girl here from the house of correction-a girl who was con-
victed of murder and sentenced to death, but whose sen-
tence, on account of her youth, was commuted to transpor- 
tation for life. Good Heaven, Miss Elfinstar!" exclaimed
the young man, breaking off, and catching the young lady 
in his arms only in time to prevent her from falling to the
ground.
He placed her on a settee on the piazza.              i
She had fainted, and lay as one dead. 
"Help here! Help! Dr. Boggs! Ah! for Heaven's sake, 
come quickly !" cried Hamilton Gower, beside himself with
terror. He had never before seen a woman faint.
The surgeon came running, followed by the chaplain.   j
"What is all this? What has happened?" demanded the 
doctor.
Then seeing the insensible form of the girl extended on
the settee, he stepped quickly to her side, took her wrist
in his hand, looked in her face, and turning sharply to Mr.  ,
Hamilton Gower, demanded: 
"What caused her to faint?"
"I know no more than you do. We were talking of the
convict Hice when she suddenly went off in this manner 1"'i
exclaimed the young gentleman, who, in his consternation,  I
. * 



<pb n="301"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   801
had quite forgotten the last turn that the conversation had
taken.
Meanwhile, the surgeon was not idle, but was briskly ap-
plying all the remedies at hand for the recovery of the girl,
who, at length, heaved a deep sigh and opened her eyes.
At this moment her father appeared with a folded paper
in hand.
Seraph, seeing him, would have struggled up to a sitting
posture had not the surgeon gently put her back, saying:
"Best lie quietly for a few moments, my dear young
lady."
"What is the matter, my dear?" anxiously inquired her
father, going to her side.
"Nothing, papa, dear, nothing whatever," answered the
girl, in as strong a voice as she could command.
"She fainted; but she has recovered, you perceive," said
the surgeon.
"Fainted? My dear child! What caused you to faint?"
tenderly inquired the old man.
"Oh, dear papa, do not disturb yourself! I am quite
well," said Seraph, now rising to a sitting position.
"Gentlemen, who was with my daughter? Can you give
me no light on the subject?" inquired Mr. Elfinstar, look-
ing from one to the other.
"I was with her, sir, and we were talking quietly to-
gether, when suddenly she dropped," said Mr. Hamilton
Gower.
"Tuberoses ! They are growing in such abundance about
the piazza, and their heavy, delicious odor is very oppres-
sive to some delicate organizations," suggested the chaplain.
"Ah, yes! the tuberoses i" assented the surgeon. "I have
known them to cause faintness before now."
"Are you sure you are better, my dear?" inquired the old
gentleman, anxiously turning to his daughter.
"I am well, papa, dear! really well. Pray pay no more
attention to me," said Seraph, earnestly.
"I think you need feel no anxiety on your daughter's ac-
count, Mr. Elfinstar! Only do not let her stand over the
tuberoses too long," said the surgeon.
"I will have them transplanted this very night," said the
old gentleman.
"And now, dear sir, we must take leave, or at least I



<pb n="302"/>
80O          A TORTURED HEART 
must; for I have patients to look after in the convict hosi? (
ptal; but Mr. Heron need not hurry," said the sugeon. :'
"Yess,yes   r.Bogg, I must ridewithyou 1 I have be
absent from my post more than twenty-four hours."      .
"Very well, reverend eir, I shall be glad to have yow'' !'
company.' 
*'Well, gentlemen, here is my application to the superm- 
tendent of convicts, to have the prisoner of the crown, John: :
Hice, assigned to me as a farm servant. Will you present
it, Mr. Heron:?" inquired Mr. lfinstar, handing his sealed -'"
paper to the chaplain.
"With pleasure, sir! And now we must bid you goo 4. 
day," said the chaplain, as he shook hands with his host. ' 
The surgeon followed his example. Both gentlemen then  '
bowed to Miss Elfinstar and Mr. Hamilton Gower, 'and 
mounted their horses and rode off.
"Are you sure you are all right, my dear?" tenderly in. 
quired the father, of his daughter.
"Oh, yes, papa, dear, I am quite, quite right; do not dis- 
turb yourself in the least about me," she answered, ear- |
neatly. 
"I am glad to hear it; but keep away from the tube- ,'i
roses, my dear."
"I will be sure to do so, papa."  -
And Mr. Elfnstar walked into the house, leaving the',
young lady and gentleman alone together on the piasza.  ,
She was sitting on the settee; he was standing near her. '
"I hope you do not suffer any inconvenience from your '
late attack of faintness," he said, observing that her' face '
.was even whiter than its wont.                         -
'"No, no; pray do not speak of such a trifle again; I for-
get it," she replied.                             .
Hamilton Gower bowed obediently. He certainly saw'
that she wished the subject dropped.
She seemed to be absorbed in thought for a few minutes,-: ..
and then she suddenly spoke. 
"Mr. Gower, please to sit down here beside me. I have: 
something to say to you."
The young gentleman bowed respectfully, and took th.
indicated seat.                             - 
She was silent for a moment, and then said, very quiet ly 
"Mr. Gower, just before my faintness you were speakta  ,,;
  ! " ,



<pb n="303"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     808
of a slave of the crown-for they are no more, sir--these
wretched convicts-than, slaves of the crown, to be workied,
scourged, imprisoned, starved, or..hired out, to heavy task-
masters at the will of their overseers, just as are the slaves
of the West Indies and South America at the will of their
owners."
"John Hice ?" sid the young gentleman, perceiving that
she paused.,
,"Yes; you were speaking of him; and now, perhaps, after
what I have said, you will understand my pity for him."
Hamilton Gower bowed, reverently.
"I do not refer to him just now, however, but to a-
young girl who was assigned to my father as his servant.
You were speaking of her."
"Yes, Miss Elfinstar."
"Do you know who she is?" This question was breathed
in an almost inaudible tone.
"I do not. The chaplain merely mentioned to me that
your father had already one assigned servant in his house
-a young girl-who had been tried for murder, and con-
victed, and sentenced to death, but whose sentence, on ac-
count of her youth, had been commuted to transportation to
these penal colonies for life."
"Did you hear her name?"
4'I beg your pardon," said the young man-for the girl
spoke so low that even his quick, attentive ears could not
catch her words.
She repeated her question, raising her tone as with an
effort.
"Her name was"-Seraph paused and caught her breath
s' if some spasm of the heart had arrested it for a ,oo
nent, and then added-"Margaret Campbell."
la rgaret Campbell l" exclaimed the young man, sud-
dezly thrown off his guard by amazement ^"Godi heav-
ensl -. 1 remember that.trial! One of the causes cbrsof
the age l She is the girl who was convicted of having mur-
d4erd    infant cousin in order to inherit his property, of
which she was the next heir  I knew it required all the
political nfluence of her powerful friends with fhe ministry
to get her death sentence commuted to transportation for
life. Di4your father know these facts, Miss Elfinstar?"
."Yes,"ihe breathed, in the same faint voioe.



<pb n="304"/>
'*do ;g W ^  A it , iu   ;~          ; :"  : ,  ..:!l
'SThet ptedon Im for Wayig {tbtt adnot  lt
-o yo can pssibly ewnde the prmene of such a 
mdoiter of daepritj and crelty uider fhe same roof wt
yburself; or how yur o: ored father, even i the caa~ot
of humanit, eould gubjeet you to sih  tril. No wo-'.
der y:.o never smile, ia  never ufliB. (No wonder yob.. 
blood is chilled btek to your lrt,)'  e mentally addoed 
"But my father believs, aind  know, t.at, c'iiol  :. :g
vced. of the .rheeil.e itla e 6it,, b      trehed it ,
girl, in the same lo' voice6.
A "You say that yobirfa1ther belite ti, and yo kInx
itl My dear .yotng lady the e        viroimasbitl 'rtil at f~
proved her guilt was perfectly orwhelii  Thei:e was'
not a single loophole for ecape or for d4or 't.'
"That is true; and' i covieted he 'an innocent h ild h'.
for ie was lr t fourteen year. of ae-of fa crimbe hich
h*e ws not apbl of iiing, mue le      f pl  ngb
and perpetating. We :   t]t Malret Campt 3wU'<
a young *,iert,, and no feloni," fia' ,.. lf.nta,, 3c , ;
mohl and        d a',: '  ':'
"~f. X mge; but it sees bltps  tihpt a't.y ,on
knew hiS,   ioproboble that any ,  shoild e.. , F,'
it. But yo     yor hioored atler 
'It  n  crit    tlis e, bdt d   'ly jMq  Ij
myb athsf aud m)teld d01oiU  hopld orop 1e 3 thg  j
facS ol moKAstwbborn ft.tB aa#.5*u>*A egn ti
But, sir, f;acta  not 4lxys trati   . 
otal and mental anid'u a c*it, *  jr
absolute, yet wfacb ab e  roved, wl erp^>  taiu
in any way. Such are 
mself in regard to Margat campheh," icPeA ,i.1
ypung lady, in a grave and eaerte tone.
The gnean boweda a aen      ecl d
"I did not, howeter,'rig up this subject for ti 
defending Margaret CampSelgl but:imply to giv 'l
warnnmg, and ask of youn a favor."        , 
"I am, entirely at your orders, M8is MWMI;wt,
yo7ug gentlenmn, earnestly.   ,  ,     . t1;h ,4
"I thnk ynou; but it is onlyt 1: T e 'l bm .l



<pb n="305"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   $05
happy girl we have been discussing is never mentioned in
the presence of my father; therefore, I would entreat you
never to allude to her existence in any manner. And now,
Mr. Gower, let us drop this subject at once, and forever.
Shall I show you the pineries? You have not seen them
yet."
Mr. Hamilton Gower bowed, arose to his feet, and offered
his arm to the young lady.
She took it with a slight inclination of her head, and
led the way around to the rear of the house where the piner-
ies were situated.
No more was said on the subject of the young convict,
Margaret Campbell.
CHAPTER XXXII
TiB HOJSE'S MYSTERY
Hn recalled all the circumstances as he had followed them
through the daily papers, from the first announcement of
the discovery of the murder to the very end of the affair,
when the convicted young murderess had had her sentence
of death commuted to transportation for life.
He recalled a certain dismal vacation spent at Hawke-
wood, when it drizzled incessantly for a month, and when
his only excitement was the daily arrival of the Times, and
how he thought just then that the "Thunderer" was about
as heavy as the weather, until one morning when he read
the caption of a paragraph as follows:
8T~ANGE DISAPPEARANOE OF A   CHI
"Tbhe neighborhood of Rosedale has been thrown into
coilderable excitement by the unaccountable disappearance
of GOrge Stuart Douglas Campbell, aged one year, only
son and' heir of the late George Murray Stuart Campbell,
Esq., of lose Hill Manor, Yorkshire. It appears that on
Monday horning last the nurse, on rising, went to the crib
as usual to see to her little charge, and was surprised to find
the boy gone and the bed clothing in disorder.
"The nurse was not alarmed, however, as she supposed



<pb n="306"/>
' ;:'.' 06       A 1a.:T   rDmrw   ~R4l    ' ;r;' ?~
.that the child might have aWakmend  rly and beeaig
off by hi% mother ito lepr oom wcic adjoined the it
.ry, and tsi whb* she i~weii lyat h  earepa ied, oil to. ,ei'o .
the terrifing repor'that the boy had not been take  ,
his mother, or by anyon else, that:mornag    ..   :
" n anxioue and thorough emination of. the ho  a
grounmd was to no effect.                        i s
"No clue to. the cid'a dispperan cecouldbe gsined. 
"The itmost aniety pV      not only throUgh, thebooui'
but thrugh the entire  ghbod. The moetal      l deil.
tectivs have fbeen empltoed to proeeute the iearch. 
twadB.habeenoea         o news."   '     ; ''" ."  , aw 
Thi  was the first  em tip  teailioa  e  d a
event that was destined to deilp ito one' of he ; oeU
brtrending domestic traed~ie that ever deeoleid , Ca
, tian home or eho'diCei a Cilie dCom ity.    , 
A ew   ay paed, rhich, of th  a     only ohronicle
the fufile efforts t dtectives to dic wver the fate of
A t tie end of the wee          anothr wationu
:grah 
"D~~5OOVIY OrW TIB KUT    i RIaXXW5i O  ' 0
"No clue has been obtai.ed to the mderer. .Thoi
oner's inquest will be held, to-day. , '  ,: 
hen followed the 4iMsting detal3a of i fiding 
the body, the.grief ofUthe  otier,. the oii f t  odr
4nd for day', .ter ethj" t1xe papers  e h a   W
detai of the inuest d      'he Ye tOn o    mw
witnesses; but no cle was $tomnd to the mystey oft
murder.*
At last, at the end of theie*ond week, came : i 1:
"TUE BOSIE HlIa; UM'rTfls   . 
iBtartling .Dvelopment.-Shoe    Jrenile Dpit
The Arrest of Margaet Mabel  ,     a Y   g ~fl
of 'Fourteen Year, and a 4. usn of the Deceae,,
the Charge    Having Mtrdeedl the Late
Stuartt Dotgla Cam pbell             .  ,: 4t,,
4 - 



<pb n="307"/>
er''''''      '     '''                '' .. ..''.
ing thC rm,;             l    e
tectivea l  1o.t '  '                    " ' ''
the dibo.ry ( Bii    .b ero    of a  child of
fourtee; r a i  ;  *  ^  ;-:  , :: .t'-''.' , .   ,.'
Never ieak        rom   riwte source, falienh 
upon the co uiltt .. ,  ; . '  ;        ,,
Nothi4  ^ :ews 3v^        ot*  '    cr. b' 'pi '  .,
h, Nothwig bt inr,!a':i":t- !iiali f drit he Od young a t.i4
intoe               PEan i gtt  P0iON <ii i
But,                   I   Xta.etdoPat Oit o  en m that, izt
mediately 1oelot  je arredt f*el d  iamn tn en the part
of the. .e's t        t of Iearcehy motib e  to
inspio, f iot 'r^i ite dft i peiiin aiid tie init
perfe t'elfhodsl  i ieeKathLk e .he . '  ' a
And  n4alri U4Z   wa the tril drng whSch
the Chbtiat"n wfr4  Ikp.ale& 1b the revolftig spectale
of ya1ti ,y^ee *hrad't ea1 for the deliberate maier iof
wacn ~h* yhe       o 'the do
her. infsn* <ox*i'Qi  i fpor  eaale oi ineritg hia ebtitea
whic. . evas;e'. B ,,,,ft  t.
Tender as e  bite Aof *w critial, not one sentiment
of p     bty o eied tot  h.t , r her. 
.Peoeg b  Ceht $t;tto B i tat the deprave atre
who was IeMoih ,evlto ic weive, plan, and perpetrafe
BO atr ooii  * dr Wtias Oite old enoigh to soer tlie
Utmnost p tiw  of e lia hi. :erpiation of her hhaous-
And      i              . .    . L1, t  
Ma; i: (ab^C:iaAbeiU w'ai the orhauiit h e
adpi      te^i fge Xi uray 8tuart CupbilC, f
Boee Sfl',Hal.: Bheowas also thfe legal heir~es' piult.ie
of his eeta1ies. he was the petted darling of her iulkle and
amun, who were old and dhildleesK  i  :
tMargaets fa.ir prospects lasted until tbh death of her
ant, for whome gieved long and deeply. Bf :she was
conwoded ly the iove oaher widowed uimlec, o Or a while
la ishe l bis kecftiotn upon her.,.t;0  fora while.
Sewsely a ybar had elapsed from the death of his wife
whld tb  old a sqHir u eofel l Vit  to the wiles
of an rtal widow of impeainioua forti&au  dand with sev-



<pb n="308"/>
808          A TORTURED HEART E
eral children, made her his wife and brought her home to
the Hall.
It was shown that this marriage filled the mind of the
child, then just twelve years old, with so much jealous rage 
that she could scarcely be induced to see or to speak to her
new aunt, who, however, was all fascinating blandness and
amiability toward the supplanted child, whose bad behavior
resulted in her being sent away from the Hall, which had 
always been her home, to a distant boarding school, where  gi
she spent two years. 
During these two years two important events occurred
at the Hall-the birth of a son and heir, who arrived ten
months after the marriage, and the illness of the old squire,  '
who, when he found himself on his deathbed, sent to recall 
his niece, whom he had never ceased to love.
Margaret Campbell returned to the Hall in time to re-
ceive her uncle's dying blessing, attend his funeral and hear
his will.
By the will he left her a thousand pounds and a home at :
the Hall, with her aunt and little cousin, until the coming 
of age of the latter; but the bulk of his personal property 
was left, with the whole of the landed estates, to the infant
heir.
This child was now nearly a year old, and the idol of the 
whole household.
Margaret was not sent back to school, but remained at the 
Hall, and shared the schoolroom with Mrs. Campbell's i
daughters by her first marriage.                       .
But Margaret made friends with neither stepaunt nori '
stepcousins. She refused to have anything to do with either.
Mrs. Campbell or her daughters, whom she seemed to look '
upon as intruders, or with the infant heir, whom she ap-ii
peared to consider a usurper.
The governess and all the house servants testified to these
facts. They thought that Margaret Campbell hated the new!s
people and infant heir who had supplanted her with a burdd
ing hatred.
All this and much more damaging testimony was broughi
out at the trial.
The detectives had ferreted out and brought home to tjh?,
accused every fact in the history of the crime. They 'hd'
shown how the key of Margaret Campbells little bedr
.:.:'',;:.$.;]



<pb n="309"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    809
on the third floor of the Hall happened to fit the lock of
the nursery; how she contrived to push the key of the
nursery lock out of its socket, and to do it so slowly that
it fell noiselessly down on the thick carpet that covered the
floor of the room; how she had then inserted her own key,
softly unlocked and opened the door and entered the room
in the dead of night, while the nurse was in her deepest
slumbers; how she had lifted the sleeping child from its
crib, carried it out of the nursery, locked the door behind
her and withdrawn the key, and, finally, how she had car-
ried the child out into the rear grounds, cruelly stopped its
innocent breath, and then dropped its body into the depths
of the dry well.
To this chain of circumstantial evidence there was an eye
or ear witness for every link.
Malvina Mattox, the eldest daughter of Mrs. Campbell,
and the room-mate of Margaret Campbell, swore and testi-
fied that the accused girl had slept with her as usual on the
night of the murder, but that she had risen about three
o'clock in the morning and gone out of her room, taking the
key of their door with her.
A young nursemaid testified that she slept on a cot in the
nursery; but, having a "grumbling" tooth, she was wakeful
and restless, and that, being between "sleep" and "wake,"
she saw Miss Margaret bending over the baby's crib that
night just after she had heard the nursery clock strike
three, but that she was so drowsy just then through the
laudanum she had put into her tooth to take much notice,
so she shut her eyes and went to sleep.
One of the stablemen testified that about half-past three
that morning he had heard a noise outside, and had got out
of bed and gone out to see what it was. It was only a stray
cow, and he was about to return to his room in the sta!;le
loft when he saw Miss Margaret leaning over the dry well.
He was so astonished at seeing her out at such an hour
that he could but stand and watch her until she turned
from the well and walked to the house and entered it by
the front door.
She looked like a person who was walking in sleep, said
this witness.
The chain of evidence was so complete that, although the
accused was a very young and beautiful girl of rank and



<pb n="310"/>
10           A TORTUtB           q4!t
aulture, ani though she woa defended by tie vt egery estIi
talent in the three kingdome, the jury, at, r a hwt ~eiUn1
tation, brought in a verdict of guilty, witboi:a^ ycorec
mendation to mercy-a verdict that was'heartily idoreed
by the whole nation, and England and the world was ' treoat,
ened with the horrible spectacle of the exeoution bf a g .i
of fourteen for the premeditated murder of her 
cou sin .. ,ti'
One paper brutally declared that, tlhogh the gir was of'
such tender age, the public ipinio  dennded that ab
should hang; in the interest of public 4fety such venomom
and dangerous young reptil  hold be       tlyi
out of exietencel     .                      .*    ' ,
The convicted girl eemed to be abandoned by all excest'
the family of her deceased mother, who were peruns   i
wealth and power.                      ,        , 
They bhad employed the best cougel for their u~hapo
young relative and had paid all the e nses-f her defen'
And now they besieged the home ecetywith ptiti
for the commutatian of her stentce             ' 
These petitions were at' length bUccesf l  Marg
Campbell's death sientce was eommuted t .traportaio
and penal servitude for life. This commutatin wa mad
ostensibly upon account of the very tender ge and.
doubtful sanity of the condemned girl, but, really, aa
one mnew, in deference to the soal position and poi
influence of, those who had petitioned for itk.  . '
And Margaret Campbell was ent out to Van Iieman'
Land in a prison ship, and so she Who had pnce been '
heiress presumptive of an old and great estate died t
oeial deathwhich is so immeen ably worm thn any ph
cal death.            *         ,
'Mr. Hamilton Gower, walkdng by the side of Miss 
star, and listening to the1 tipplin mtoicu of her voice as
babbled prettily of wild or of cultivated flowers, fruits,
shrubs, remembered how the details of this shcking'di
mestie tragedy had formed the staple interest of the pa
in which they were published from day to day for  "
weeks, during which he had passed his dismal, rwli
holiday at Hawke Hall.
And now that he had long forgotten all about 
Campbell and her unnatural crime, to think that the
., . .  .. *.*t.
4: d



<pb n="311"/>
oadbi ctM    ,Aod rlle8 to hie m emory te  h in the'wida
of lwda, , b         n ,     iae i         the 8(1x1/.
roof .withth et inutletreus      she us was . ' ,serving olt,
her sentBoe  o peal servitude  er en amelirated forte
and im theheou: of a hm ibtr. ,.' 
But,, Miri H iliton Goweij aed himself, was hanaaii1t
the only 'motive tlat idued the m*tter of the, M qu~nts 
Hermitawe to ltsk tihe covict girl iao his own eervice 
O,, go,:d . eav .: igt: : b  t ,h-self 'be, e of. tbom,
"relatmjs i. .   decea'e4 mpther'-^rie of thse wealthyy
and powel ei who hd pai4 o,' her deese0 uad petic
tioneo  aeMlly forthe cr       tin of 'e ee?          v
If; s, lad he oome out to the clobie and settled here
for the o*preua pmr~se of ta  hiae i tfotinate youg rel-
ative whom he believed to be imowent into hit own sa~iee
as his aslned servnt that by o doing he might softe
the severity of, he faeP.  i
This er    wttooi   in   fer   verthi   that had
"eemed ab 8ai'kge:Q i.is~ inanr of Uife . -B gt, then, had he
not done this at an immense etrific to his own i'nnoCnt
and baintil yg    dauhter?
Hamilton G:w q er longed to nw the trth,    ,
H   am.re4 nsf t .t t the suect to M ` ElfiRi tar, or to her
father. ,  be haWl rned him that the sbieet was a mos  . 
painftl one o the m~ter of the Mountain  ermitsge, and
she had salt:ihim Rlil1o: Gow.er, newer to au4e to it
in the p  qreien  ofd kr. El ta.
An~d iioltit oeirmde to him that thievery extre e si-
ti:es seemed             : tgate that the yomng c'onvie t was s.i~e-
thing more .'thilm tx a a miery asmigned eervant. 
No; NMr, Hailtoi  G ower eeld gaet no information from
the familyas to the real relations existing between them and
their covet.  P seant'
He might ask the chaplain; brotwould it not seem treach-
eros, to ,ee that information outside of the honse *'ich
he wae forbidden to obtain within it? !Wouldit nat, eem
like ting to pry into the ecrets of  family' who were
exte.nd4i their hospitlity to himP
NoW;B! hrould nt ask the chaplain anything abo;t Mr.
Elbeterar afeiazed servant.
Whi llU thesa thoaghts had been passing through the
yongi gpti"   a Zn'i  he had isited the pinry, the fern-



<pb n="312"/>
312          A TORTURED HEART
ery, the apiary, the aviary, and many other objects of in-
terest on the estate, and had heard and answered the explan-
ations and comments made by his companion.
Now they were on their way to the house in response to
the first dinner bell.
At dinner Mr. Hamilton Gower could not help watching
the father and daughter with new interest.
Gentle, grave, and friendly in their demeanor toward each
other and toward their guest, they gave no cause for criti-
cism.
'Yet why had they, wealthy and cultivated gentleman and
lady, come to this mountain wilderness in a convict colony
at the antipodes of civilization to make their home for life?
Why had they no intercourse whatever with the few re-
spectable English colonists? Why did they keep themselves
apart from all their neighbors?
Why did they take so very deep an interest in the fate
of the convicted murderess, Margaret Campbell, that, al-
though she was their assigned servant, working out her sen-
tence of penal servitude in their house, they could not bear
the subject of her crime and conviction mentioned in their
presence ?
And where, meanwhile, about the house was this convict
servant employed ? He thought he had seen all the house-
maids there. They were stout, red-cheeked, laughing Eng-
lish girls, with whose appearance it was simply impossible
to associate crime or tragedy of any sort.
Margaret Campbell was not to be found among them,
certainly. Perhaps she was the lady's maid of Miss Elfin-
star, and dwelt in her private apartments. But, oh! what
a companion for Seraph! For he, Hamilton Gower, did
not share the faith of his host and hostess in the inno-
cence of their convict prot6g6e. The evidence given at the
trial made it quite impossible for him to do so.
But what was this atrocious young criminal to the Elfin-
star ?
There seemed to be, under all the circumstances, but one
answer to the question. She was a very near relative-
probably the sister's child, the niece of the old gentleman
and the first cousin of the young lady, and for her sake
the father and daughter had expatriated themselves from
all they held dear in their native land and come to the



<pb n="313"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    813
penal settlement, this savage land of convicts, bushmen, and
wild beasts !
While Hamilton Gower was turning these subjects ovee
in his own mind, he became so abstracted as to draw the
kindly attention of his host, who, turning to him, said,
gently:
"I fear you find our Mountain Hermitage rather dull, my
friend."
"On the contrary, I find your home so full of interest
that I have really been tempted into trespassing on vouc,
hospitality much too long, and even now I very much la-
ment the necessity of leaving you," replied the young gen..
tleman, with more truth than usually goes to the making up
of courteous speeches.
"I hope you are not going to leave us soon," said his
host, in a tone of such sincerity as could not be doubted.
"I was thinking of saying good-by to-morrow morning,"
said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"I beg you, as a personal favor, to change your purpose,
and-unless business should call you away-remain with us
for some weeks," pleaded the old gentleman, with such an
earnestness of manner that could not be mistaken for mere
politeness, while the young lady looked on, silent, but in-
terested.
"You are exceedingly kind, and I thank you heartily. 
Nothing could give me more pleasure than to prolong my
stay. I am only a tourist who left England about sixteen
months ago, to give myself the advantage of a couple of
years' travel in foreign lands. I have really no serious busi-
ness to call me away, while you can endure my society,"
replied the young gentleman, frankly.
"Then pray consider yourself even as a son of the house
as long as you can endure us," said Mr. Elfinstar, cordially,
while the nearest approach to a smile that the young man
had ever seen here beamed in the eyes of Seraph Elfinstar.
"I cannot but express my wonder and gratification that
you should receive me-a total stranger-with as much of
courtesy and confidence as though I had come accredited
to you by letters of introduction from the most reliable
sources," said the young stranger.
"There are faces, or, I should say, countenances, my dear
sir, which are sufficient letters of introduction to observant



<pb n="314"/>
314          A TORTURED HEART
and thoughtful men. Your countenance, I beg leave to say,
is such a one, in its character of expression. Besides, you
forget the vital, the invaluable service you rendered us in
rescuing my daughter from the hands of that maddened
rufllian."
"Oh, Mr. Elfinstar, I was but too highly favored of for-
tune to have the opportunity of so serving Miss Elfinstar.
I am but too happy to have been of use to her!" warmly
responded the young man.
It was evident that the spirits of both the father and the
daughter were raised by the prospect of retaining their
gu(et for some time longer.
After dinner the two gentlemen went into the rear room
to visit the wounded convict, whom they found awake and
alone.
He did not now require the constant attendance of a
nurse.
Mr. Elfinstar sat down near the head of the bed and Mr.
Hamilton Gower near the foot.
"How do you find yourself, Hice?" inquired the former.
"Better than I expected or wished to be, sir," answered
the convict, with some return to his former surliness.
"You are going to get well, you know."
"Ay, I know it, sir, more's the pity !"
"Why do you say that, my man ?" kindly inquired the old
gentleman.
"Because if the parson could have given me a passport
into Paradise, or even into Purgatory, with some hope of
Paradise after a few thousand years, it would have been
better for me to die than to go back to that infernal chain,"
rcnlicd the convict, with a countenance darkened by de-
spair.
"Buit, my man, the parson could have given you no such
passport, as you know very well."
"Oh, I know!" growled the wretch.
"Nor is it likely that you were prepared to meet your
God," mildly added the old man.
"Oh, I'd have risked it! I'd have taken my chance with
Him rather than have gone back to the chain gang."
"But you will not be sent back to the chain gang."
"What!" exclaimed the convict, incredulously.
"You will never be sent back to the chain gang. At the



<pb n="315"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    315
intercession of the chaplain and the surgeon, you will be
assigned to private service."
"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!" laughed the man. "That's a
good un I That's a likely joke, that is! The parson and the
doctor are very kind; but who in the deuce is going to take
me for a servant ?"
"1 will do so, if you choose to serve me," replied Mr.
Elfinstar, gently.
The convict raised himself up on his elbow and stared at
the speaker in utter amazement for a good long time, as it
seemed to the spectators. Then he requested:
"Please say that over again, slowly, so that I can hear
and understand."
The kind old man complied.
"I will gladly take you into my service as my gardener,
if you should be willing to remain with me in that ca-
pacity," he replied, with some improvements upon his
former words.
The convict, who had listened and gazed with fixed atten-
tion, now closed his eyes, fell back on the pillow, and turned
away from his kind benefactor.
No one knew in what spirit the half insane creature had
received this proposition. It looked very much as if he had
met it with surly ingratitude.
But presently the bedclothes began to move with more
and more force, and it was seen that the man under them
was sobbing with increasing violence that shook his whole
frame.
This continued some minutes, during which the two gen-
tlemen waited in considerate silence for this storm of emo-
tion to subside.
At length, still sobbing, the convict put one hand out
from under the coverlet and felt about blindly.
Mr. Elfinstar placed his own hand within that seeking
one, and the convict drew it toward him and pressed it pas-
sionately to his lips, to his heart, and to his tearful eyes,
before he released it.
Then, after drying his face with the hem of his sheet, he
turned to his benefactor and said, in faltering tones:
"Pardon me, sir, for not thank-    "  And he broke
down again.



<pb n="316"/>
316          A TORTURED HEART
"Say no more, my poor fellow! Your strong emotion
speaks more than words," said Mr. Elfinstar, kindly.
"You will take me for your gardener, sir?" inquired
Hice, recovering himself with an effort.
"Yes, if you like. I have already made the application
to the commandant."
"I am called the worst man in the penal settlements! I
have been threatened with Norfolk Island."
"We will give you a chance here," quietly observed the
old gentleman.
"I assaulted your young daughter and nearly killed her
with terror. But I swear by all I hold most sacred on earth
-I swear by the grave of my mother that I never intended
to do her any personal injury! I only meant to take her
gold chain because I was starving and desperate !"
"You will never be tempted to such violence again," said
Mr. Elfinstar.
"And you pardon me all that? And you take me out of
the hell of the chain gang in the quarries and put me into
the heaven of your garden ! For burning stones, and blis-
tering heat, and dust, and squalor, and degrading slavery,
you give me trees, flowers, beauty, cleanliness, pleasant work
and kind treatment!" said the man, inspired by the good-
ness of his benefactor.
"It is a pleasure to us to do all this," replied Mr. Elfin-
star.
"But the young lady whom I assaulted and terrified?
She will never venture into her own garden. The sight of
the ruffian who assaulted her would overcome her with
horror."
"Not so; my daughter is courageous and sensible. She
understands. She will speak pardon to you in person, and
then she will be quite willing to forget tlat adventure in
the wilderness."
"Oh, tell her-pray tell her-that I never meant to do
her a persona] injury !" pleaded Hice.
"You said that before, and your words have been reported
to Miss Elfinstar. She believed them," explained Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower.
"And now here is Mrs. Annis with your supper. We will
leave you to enjoy it. And then, sleep well," said 31r.
Elfinstar, rising.



<pb n="317"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    517
"Sir," said Hice, taking the hand of his benefactor and
holding it, while he gazed gratefully and affectionately into
his face, "I have been called brute, monster, ruffian, des-
perado, devil; but my worst enemy never called me a hypo-
crite. Oh, please to believe me, therefore, when I tell you
that I think you have saved my soul!"
"Under the Divine Providence, Hice," added the old
man.
"Under the Divine Providence, sir," assented the con-
vict.
And the two gentlemen left him with his new hopes.
CHAPTER XXXIII
LOVE IN A WILDERNESS
THE morning after the events recorded in the last chap-
ter the surgeon appeared at the Mountain Hermitage, bring-
ing with him the necessary documents that transferred John
Hice, a prisoner of the crown, sentenced to seven years of
transportation and hard labor, to the special service of Theo-
bald Elfinstar, Esq., of Mount Humboldt.
When Mr. Elfinstar and Dr. Boggs went to the bedside
of the convict with this news, the man warmly grasped
the hand of his new master and turned a grateful look
upon the surgeon, saying:
"I don't want to disparage medical science, doctor, but-
the news you bring me is more healing than all your drugs."
"Glad to hear you say so; it may save the government
some expense in medicines. And, now, you have only got
to get well as soon as possible," said the surgeon, good-
humoredly.
"And you shall not be hurried. You shall be strong
enough to desire work before you are put to it," added Mr.
Elfinstar.
This was the surgeon's last visit; he took leave of his
patient, saying that he should not visit him again unless
he was sent for.
He dined with the family, and then bade them adieu and
returned to Hobart Town.



<pb n="318"/>
818          A TORTURED HEART
The next day the convalescent man sat up and read
books provided for him by Mr. Elfinstar.
The third day he walked out in the garden to view the
scene of his future labors. 
And on the Monday of the next week he went to work,
under the instructions of the head gardener, a gray-haired
old man who had now more knowledge than strength, and
who was, therefore, very glad of an able-bodied assistant
to relieve him.
This old man, whose name was Larry Tod, lived alone in
the gardener's cottage, which was large enough to accom-
modate a family had he owned one; but he was a bachelor,
with an aged sister for a housekeeper, and so he found
plenty of room in his house for John Hice.
Many domestic servants might object to associate with 
an assigned convict; but not those of the Mountain Her-
mitage. The spirit of the master pervaded the whole es-  '
tablishment, from the dignified housekeeper and pompous
butler down to the meekest kitchenmaid and the humblest 
stableboy.
His will was supreme, and his word was law to the people
who revered and loved him.
If John Hice was good enough to be received into their
master's service, he was good enough to be received into
their company, they might have argued, if any questions as
to the propriety of the arrangement had come up.
But no such question was started. They accepted their 
master's act as a matter of course. 
Mr. Elfinstar provided his new servant with clothes,
books, writing materials, and, in fact, all that the man 
needed to make him comfortable in the gardener's cottage,
and to help on his mental, moral, and religious improve- 
ment. 
Many persons might have thought that the old gentleman
went too far, much too far, in his kindness to the convict.
Those who, like the Scribes and Pharisees of the first
century, who denounced Our Savior for His tender mercy
to publicans and sinners, and, like the practical philoso-
phers of our own times, who criticize the "sentimental"
sympathy of Christians and philanthropists for prisoners
and criminals, might have severely censured the course of
old Theobald Elfinstar toward his convict servant.



<pb n="319"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     319
But the Lord will judge.
John Hice was removed from want and temptation. He
was relieved from the one great burden that had so long
oppressed his conscience and so nearly driven him mad-
the imagined murder of his brother. He was beginning a
new life.
He said that he was happy, and he looked so. He said
that he had freedom instead of chains; cleanness for dirt;
flowers for stones; kind words for threats; good for evil I
And not only was the redeemed sinner happy, but every--
one on the premises was happier in witnessing his happi-
ness.
The first smile that Hamilton Gower had ever seen on
the beautiful, bloodless face of Seraph Elfinstar beamed
upon the "assigned servant," when, in walking in the gar-
den, they came upon him at work gathering fruit and flow-
ers for the dinner table.
But Mr. Hamilton Gower had his own embarrassments
under the circumstances. He was very glad indeed that the
blood of Hice did not rest on his soul; for, however justi-
fiable had been that shot which had laid the desperado low,
and rescued the young lady from peril, had it proved a fa-
tal one, its consequences must have overshadowed the mem-
ory of the young gentleman who had fired it with gloomiest
remorse.
Yes, he was very glad that John Hice still lived; but,
as has been said, he had his own embarrassments under the
circumstances.
He had a secret which he half believed he ought to impart
to that man, and yet which he would have guarded from
all men with his very life.
Mr. Elfinstar's household attended no place of public
worship. They were too far distant from any church to
enjoy such a privilege.
But the old gentleman, on every Sunday morning, as-
sembled his whole family and all his servants in the dining
room of the Hermitage, and there he held the services and
read an excellent sermon selected from the writings of the
most eloquent Christian writers and pulpit orators.
Of late, all his sermons were selected with a view to the
case of John Hice, who was always of his little congregation
the most unaffectedly interested.



<pb n="320"/>
~20          A TORTURED HEART
In this qliet manner life went on at the Mountain Her-
mitage for a month longer. Young Hamilton Gower and
Seraph Elfinstar, thrown constantly together as they were,
formed a strong attachment for each other.
Not a word of love had been spoken between them.
Hamilton Gower, a stranger guest, received with confi-
dence into the bosom of the family, would not betray that
confidence by wooing the daughter of the house without first
gaining the consent of her father, so he never "breathed his
love" in words; but, ah! he could not always control his
tones and looks; these betrayed the passion that was glowing
in his bosom for the beautiful girl, while her downcast eyes,
blushing cheeks, and trembling frame, when he was near,  '
inspired him with hope that his love was returned.
The fifth week of his sojourn at the Mountain Hermitage
was drawing to a close, and he was beginning to fear, in
spite of the kindness of his host and hostess, and the pleas-
ure they seemed to take in his society, and the delight he
felt in theirs, that he was unreasonably prolonging his visit  t
and must make up his mind to say good-by.
But not until he had .asked permission of Mr. Elfinstar
to propose marriage to his daughter-and not to go away
to a distance. Oh, no! he could not leave Seraph Elfinstar
so long! He would only go to Hobart Town and take up
his abode there for the period of his self-imposed exile, 
which was now within seven months of its close; and from
that point he would visit his betrothed as frequently as pos-
sible, and when the time for his return to his own country
should arrive he would make her his wife and take her 
with him.
These were his thoughts and intentions. He felt not the
slightest doubt of his success in wooing.
He knew, without vanity, that his love was returned. He 
knew that he himself was esteemed by the father of his be-
loved. And he knew that his social position warranted him
in asking the hand of Miss Elfinstar in marriage. 
He felt that he must throw off his masquerading disguise,
however, and declare his real name and rank and his mo-
tives for dropping them for a season, before he could gain
Mr. Elfinstar's consent to the desired marriage with his  *
daughter.



<pb n="321"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   321
This the young gentleman determined to do at once, be-
fore he should bid adieu to the family.
But his purpose was interrupted and his visit prolonged
by an unexpected event.
One morning-the very morning of the day on which he
had resolved to ask a private interview with Mr. Elfinstar
for the purpose of soliciting the hand of his daughter--
while the family were seated at breakfast the Hall footman
came in, touched his forehead and said:
"If you please, sir, here is Mr. Tod asking to see you."
"The gardener ! Tell him to come in here," said the old
gentleman.
The footman retreated and soon showed in Larry Tod,
who stood bowing at the door, with his gray head bare, and
showing signs of disturbance.
"Well, Tod, what is it?" kindly inquired his master.
"Oh, if you please, sir, it is Hice!" said the old man,
fumbling over his gray straw hat that he held with both
hands down against his knees.
"Hice! What of him?" uneasily inquired iMr. Elfinstar,
while his daughter and his guest looked anxiously on.
What on earth were they going to hear about Hice? What
fault, what complaint, or what misfortune connected with
the assigned servant had the old head gardener come to
report?
"What of Hice? What's the matter with him?" again
inquired the master of the house, perceiving that Tod fum-
bled his hat in embarrassed silence.
"I'm afeard, sir, as he is gone, sir!" said the old gar-
dener, solemnly.
"Gone!" echoed the three persons at the table in one
breath.
Had John Hice really gone-bolted-run away from the
place-betrayed his master's and his benefactor's confi-
dence? It could not be so! What a text for the practical
philosophers, the Scribes and Pharisees of the present day,
who have no sympathy for convicts, to expatiate upon!
"'Gone,' did you say? John Hice gone?" mournfully
inquired Mr. Elfinstar, as if he could not believe the evi-
dence of his own ears.
"I'm afeard so, sir," sighed the old man, sadly shaking
his head.



<pb n="322"/>
822          A TORTURED HEART
"When did he go?" demanded Mr. Elfinstar.
"I don't exactly know, sir; but I think it must have
been some time in the night."
"When did you find it out?"
"This morning, sir, when he didn't come to his breakfast,
and I went to look for him and found he was gone."
"Poor fellow  Poor, misguided fool! I am very, very
sorry for him " sighed the old gentleman.
And the two young people looked the grief and disap-
pointment that they did not otherwise express.
"So be I, sir," groaned the old gardener-"as sorry as if
the lad was my own son, I be!" 
"What caused him to go off so suddenly, do you think, 
Tod ?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Lor' A'mighty knows, your honor, for I don't!"
"Had you any misunderstanding with him?" inquired
Mr. Elfinstar.
"I beg pardon, your honor!" replied the perplexed old
man.
"Had you quarreled-you and he?" inquired the master
of the house, putting his question in another form.
"Quarreled? Lord love your honor, no, sir; we was the
very best of friends! He eat his supper with us last night
as hearty and as cheerful as ever you see a man, and after
supper he sat down and finished a pretty little wicker
workbasket as he had worked on evenings for a week or
more, and he give it to my sister, and then he played check-
ers with me until bedtime, and then we had evening wor-
ship, sir, he a-listening to the Word and joining in the
hymn and the prayer, as attentive and respectful as could
be! Ah! it is a satisfaction to think he did that, sir, if he
has gone   And he took his candle and went upstairs as 
blithe as a bird, bidding us good-night with a smile! Ah,
little did I think then as that was the last time he would
ever bid us good-night, sir! But it was so, your honor sees;
for when I went to look for him this morning I found as
he was gone."
"The miserable boy!" murmured the old gentleman, all
his faith in human nature threatened with death by the de-
fection of John Hice. "The poor fool! Well, well, the
commandant was right, I fear, when he said that it was
hardly possible to reform a convict ! My dears, I am more



<pb n="323"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   323
distressed at this affair than you could believe !" he added,
turning to the young lady and gentleman who were listen-
ing with attentive, sorrowful faces.
"Indeed, we know that you are, sir," said Mr. Hamilton
Gower.
Seraph said nothing; she seemed overwhelmed with sur-
prise and disappointment at the reported conduct of this
assigned servant.
That he to whom they had forgiven so much! for whom
they had done so much! and even run such risks!-that
he should have proved so deceitful, so ungrateful, so irre-
claimable. Oh! and so insane, so idiotic as to run away
from a good home and kind friends, and destroy his only
hope and chance of redemption and happiness in this world!
What could he expect would be the end of such conduct?
He never could get away from the island. That would be
utterly impossible. He must either starve in the wilderness,
as he had been in danger of doing once, or he must be re-
captured and carried back to the chain gang. The com-
mandant would never let him out to private service again.
"No, they do say that these men are never to be re-
formed. Yet I had hoped so much from that boy. But
perhaps he only longed for full liberty, poor wretch, and
only ran away to get it! A fatal mistake! But perhaps he
did no worse; took nothing with him! Say, Tod! when
you went into his room and found him gone, did you miss
anything?" inquired Mr. Elfinstar.
"Not a single thing, your honor! Everything was there
in its place!" replied the gardener.
"Then he took nothing with him?"
"I beg your pardon, sir?"
"He took nothing with him, I say?"
"Who, sir?"
"John Hice."
"John Hice, sir?"
"Yes, yes, he, John Hice!" exclaimed Mr. Elfinstar,
rather impatiently, while the two young people listened with
the deepest interest.
If it could be proved, now, that John Hice was only a
runaway, not a relapsed thief!
But the old man fumbled his hat and rumpled his hair,



<pb n="324"/>
8324         A TORTURED HEART
and looked utterly perplexed; at length he said, depreca- 
tingly:
"Beg pardon, sir, but I don't understand-I don't, in- 
deed." 
"Why, surely I speak plainly enough! I ask you if
John Ilice took anything away with him when he went off,"
repeated Mr. Elfinstar, now speaking with great patience
and distinctness.
But the old gardener opened his eyes to their widest ex-
tent and stared with all his might.
"Well, well; can't you speak?" demanded the old gentle-
man, relapsing into impatience.
"B>eg pardon again, sir; but did your honor ask me if-if
-John lice took anything away witl him wlien he went 
off?" slowly and carefully repeated the old gardener.
"Yes; that is just exactly what I did ask you-did John
lice take anything away with him whlen he left? Did he,
now?" curtly demanded Mr. Elfinstar.
"Wihy, lor, no, sir, of course lie didn't," replied the gar
dencr, with a look of amazement.
"Well, tlien, why couldn't you have said so before, Tod?  ''
He took; nothing. I am very glad to hear it."
"Why, how could he-begging your honor's pardon ? The  ?
Word says: 'We brought nothing into his world, and it is 
certain that we can take nothing out of it.' So how could  '<.
that poor lad take anything away with him?" incisively 
questioned the old man.                                  ,
It was now tile turn of all Tod's hearers to stare. 
"What-what-what do you mean by that ?" demanded 
Mr. Elfinstar in words, while his two young companions
asked the same question in looks.
"Why, sir, I mean as he couldn't, your honor knows, any
more than anyone else who ever departed this life !" said the
old gardener, whose patience was beginning to be sorely
tried.
" 'Departed this life!' Good Heaven ! You do not mean
to say that John Hice has departed this life !" exclaimed
Mr. Elfinstar, rising from his chair in great excitement.
"Yes, master; yes, your honor; I'm afeard so, sir; indeed,
I'm as good as sartin it is so."
"But you said lie had run away!"
"Oh, no, dear sir; your honor must 'a' mis-heard me. I



<pb n="325"/>
A TORTURED HEART                  3S5
could never 'a' said John Hice had run away, because he
hadn't. He never would 'a' run away, poor lad I He never
would 'o' done it 1 He was too happy, sir."
"But you really did tell us that he had bolted," put in
Mr. Hamilton Gower, in a tone of perplexity.
"Oh, no, dear sir; how very much mistaken you are. It
never entered my head to accuse that poor lad of bolting;
which I'm sure it never entered his head to do it, sir. Poor
lad !"
"But, Mr. Tod," said Seraph, "you surely told us that he
had gone off?"
"Did I use them very words, miss?"
"Indeed you did, Mr. Tod. You said you went to look
for him and found him gone-and we thought you meant
he had run away," gravely explained Seraph.
"Then if I did, miss-for I disremember what I did say
exactly, only I know that it wasn't that he had run away
or bolted-but if I said he had gone, I only meant that bh
had gone to his final home, miss; that was all !"
"Come, Gower; let us go down to the gardener's cottage
and see what really has happened. The poor fellow has 1,ot
run away, thank Heaven! and he can't be dead, you know;
it is out of the question! I saw him and talked with 1,im
myself yesterday at sunset, and he was in excellent health
and spirits then. It is all nonsense about his being dead,
you know."
"Oh, my dear father, I am so relieved to think h? has
not run away! I-I really think I would rather hear that
he had died, indeed, than that he had so betrayed ^ and
destroyed himself."
"I agree with you entirely, my dear; but I holp that
neither is the case. Come, Mr. Gower," said the old gentle-
man, leading the way, and followed by his guest Ad his
gardener.
CHAPTER XXXIV
AT PEACE
THE party walked down all the terraces to the lowest
plain of the grounds, where the cottage stood in itr pwe
*f shade trees close by the garden gate.



<pb n="326"/>
856          A TORTURED HEART,
They were met at the door by Sarah Tod, the gardener's
old sister, and she was weeping, with her apron held up to
her eyes.
"This is bad news I hear, Sarah, but I hope not so bad
as reported. How is Hice?" inquired Mr. Elfinstar, as he
stopped.
"Oh, sir, he is gone, poor lad he is gone! and it is so
sudden! Oh: it is so sudden 1" wept the woman.
"It is so sudden that it cannot be true 1 He had nothing
the matter with him 1"
"Oh, sir, it is true! too true! He is gone, sir! He is  :
gone ! His body is stiff and cold  I have just straightened
it out !" sobbed the woman.i
"Let me see it," said Mr. Elfinstar, gently pushing his
way past the weeping woman, and entering the house.
"It is upstairs on his own bed, sir; there's where I laid '
it out, sir. I'll show you the way."
"I can find it. I know his room. Come, Gower," said
the old gentleman, leading the way upstairs, followed by
his guest and the gardener's sister. 
They entered the front room over the parlor-a bedroom .
as clean, neat, and dainty as the chamber of a young girl ' 
There were white muslin curtains to the one front window,
a white draped dressing table under it and a white bed, on 
which, 
"Calm as a child that sinks to sleep,"
the body of the young gardener lay.
Sarah Tod turned down the sheet and revealed the peace- '
ful face, to which death had given the touch of refinement 
it had lacked in life. 
"Poor fellow! Oh, poor fellow !" murmured Mr. Elfin-
star, placing his hand gently upon the pale, cold brow. 
"And we thought he had run away! How unjust we have
been in our judgment of him! He is gone, indeed! But,
oh, how much better that he should be gone as he has than
that he should have gone as we supposed him to have done.
And, great Heaven, Mr. Gower, how much he looks like you
now!" suddenly exclaimed Mr. Elfinstar.
But Hamilton Gower had turned away and was appar.
ently gazing out of the window.
A terrible fear had seized him that this sudden death of
''4



<pb n="327"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   327
his poor, unacknowledged half-brother might have been
caused by the wound he himself had given him five weeks
before. He had read of cases where a shot would lie perdu
in some inaccessible portion of a man's body, and the man
would get entirely well and go about his usual business,
until suddenly the shot would drop into some vital part
and the man fall dead.
It made him ill to think that such might have been the
case with John Hice!
"What could ha' caused the poor lad to go off as sudden
as all this, sir?" inquired Sarah Tod of the old squire.
"I cannot imagine. Poor boy! Poor boy ! I must send
for the coroner and also for the surgeon. There must be
an inquest, and there should also be a post-mortem examina-
tion. What do you think, Gower ?" inquired Mr. Elfinstar,
as he covered up the face of the dead and turned to his
guest at the window.
"Oh, yes, sir, yes! a post-mortem examination is abso-
lutely necessary," answered the young gentleman, who knew
that such an examination would show the cause of death
and end the suspense which he felt that he could not long
endure.
"Tod, hasten to the stable and tell Stackpole to saddle a
horse and get himself ready to ride to Hobart Town, then
to come for further orders up to the house. I must write
for the coroner and for the surgeon. Poor lad! Poor lad!
He said that garden was his heaven; he had 'flowers for
stones'  Ah, I hope he has a better heaven now. Seraph
will be sorry; Seraph will be very sorry. Still, it is better
so than that he should have backslidden and run away,"
concluded the old gentleman, as he turned to leave the room.
"Infinitely better so, sir," assented the younger one, as he
followed.
Sarah Tod remained in the room, watching the dead.
Larry Tod had hastened to the stables to convey his mas-
ter's orders to the groom.
Mr. Elfinstar and Mr. Hamilton Gower walked slowly
and thoughtfully back to the house.
Mr. Elfinstar went at once to his study to write a note
to the coroner and another to the surgeon of the convict
barracks.



<pb n="328"/>
328           A TORTURED HEART
Mr. Hamilton Gower went to find Miss Elfinstar, who
was still anxiously waiting in the breakfast room.
"Well?" she exclaimed, rising to meet him as he was
about to enter.
"It is true; poor Hice has passed away," he replied, as
he handed his hat and gloves to a footman in attendance
and advanced toward her.
She sank silently into a chair. He seated himself near
her.
"It was fearfully sudden," she said, at last.
"It was, indeed," responded her companion.
"What was the cause of death?" she inquired, in the low
and awe-stricken tone in which such questions, under such
circumstances, are always asked.
"No one knows as yet. We all heard what Tod said:
Rice went to bed at his usual hour in good health and
spirits. This morning he was found dead in his bed, having
apparently died quietly in his sleep."
"It is very strange and very, very sad," murmured
Seraph.
"To us it seems sad; but is it really so, under the circum-
stances?"
"No, it is well," she said, but she said it with a sigh.
A little movement in the hall caused her to rise and step
out.
It was only made by the announcement of the mounted
messenger come to take his orders from the master of the
house.
The hall door stood open, the tall, gaunt figure of Jonas
Stackpole within it, and a powerful roadster, saddled and
bridled for the journey, waited without on the upper ter-
race. A footman had taken the message to his master in
the library.
The old gentleman soon came out with two letters in
his hands.
He glanced through the hall door, and seeing the saddled
horse, gave a short nod of approval, and said:
"Ah, you have got Goliath! Quite right. You cannot
overwork him between this and the city. Don't spare him,
therefore, but take these letters, ride as fast as you can to
Hobart Town, and deliver them to their addresses. Then
put up your horse at the Royal Albert, and let him rest



<pb n="329"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   829
until evening. I mean until about four o'clock in the after-
noon. You had better give yourself time to get home by
daylight:
Jonas Stackpole took the letters and bowed, saying:
"I will be careful to follow your directions, sir."
Then he went out, threw himself on horseback, and gal-
loped away.
"Papa, can I do anything?" inquired Seraph.
"In what manner, my dear?"
"Why-at the gardener's cottage."
"Oh, no, my dear, nothing as yet. Nothing must be dis-
turbed until the coroner has viewed the body. You had best
go about your usual avocations, my dear, or-Gower, take
her out for a walk."
The young gentleman was only too glad to avail himself
of this privilege. He went and took the young lady's gar-
den hat from its hook in the back passage and put it on her
head with a bow; then, with his own "wide-awake" in his
hand, he offered her his arm.
"I do not wish to go far, and not into the garden this
morning. Take me to Gehenna," she said, as she passed her
hand through his arm.
"Gehenna !" he echoed, in some surprise.
"Yes; it is at the back of this plateau, and under the
shadow of the precipice. I called it Gehenna. I like to go
there sometimes, as the Jews like to go to their 'chamber
of desolation,' " she explained.
"Show me the way to Gehenna, then. With you by my
side it will be paradise," he whispered; and the next mo-
ment he could have bitten his silly young tongue off for
making such a stupid and frivolous speech.
But happily she took no notice. She was thinking of
more serious subjects than pretty speeches from a lover's
lips.
She led him to a thicket in the extreme rear of the
grounds and under the deep shadow of the precipice.
It was a gloomy, savage, and terrific scene of jagged rocks,
thrown up in piles as by some mad convulsion of nature,
deep clefts and treacherous holes, from which grew up
gigantic thorns and thistles, and noxious weeds from which
exhaled pungent odors, and about which crept venomous
reptiles.



<pb n="330"/>
830           A TORTURED HEART 
Hamilton Gower glanced around with feelings of disgust
and abhorrence.
"Do not stay here, Miss Elfinstar! The place is repulsive
and even dangerous!" he said.
"I call it Gehenna," she replied. 
"Let me take you back into the cultivated grounds. Why 
will you come here?"
"It suits my mood."
"But you might be bitten by some venomous reptile or: 
stung by some noxious beetle."
"I never have been hurt by either; but you might be less 
fortunate. I beg you will leave me here and return to  '
the house."
"As if I could do that !"
"But the place is as familiar to me as any arbor in our
gardens. I come here very often." 
"Not alone, I hope."
She hesitated for a moment, and then answered:
"No, not quite alone. I never come here quite alone. I 
always bring-Margaret Campbell."
"Great heavens!" exclaimed the young man. 
"Why, what is the matter? Has any reptile stung you?"  t
she inquired, with the faintest dash of sarcasm in her sweet-
toned voice. 
"Your words have stung me, Miss Elfinstar!" he said, :
with a shudder. 
"But why should they?" she persisted.
"Because they present a horrible picture!-the picture \
of such a companion in such a place for you !"
"You are very unjust and cruel in your judgment of' }
that poor girl."
"I do not judge ler. I do not wish to get near enough
to the child murderer, even in thought, for that process. I
should never trouble myself about her did she not affect Y
your life so disastrously! You must know that her sphere i
is deadly to you."
"Well, I cannot help it," said Seraph, with a profound ,
sigh, "I cannot get rid of her, that is certain."
"And she takes you-as evil spirits took those whom
they entered-into the wilderness-into such a wilderness .
of rocks and pitfalls, noxious weeds and venomous reptiles '
as this!"



<pb n="331"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   SS1
"Yes, she does do this!" sighed Seraph, with a look of
suffering, patient resignation that seemed to break the
heart of her lover.
"Miss Elfinstar," he began, in a grave, firm voice-"par-
don me for what may seem to be an impertinent criticism,
but it is only my deep interest in your welfare that urges
me to say that your honored father, in his wide humanity,
overlooks the interest of his child when he subjects her to
the fearful trial of this girl's company."
"Poor old father! I do not think he can help what he
does, Mr. Gower; but if you please, we will talk no more of
Margaret Campbell. She is a most unprofitable subject.
Let me try to forget her, for a while. And come up here
to the top of this pile of rocks, where we can sit secure
from the contact of noxious weed or the approach of venom-
ous reptiles," she added, as, with the agility of a kid, she
climbed to the top of a pile of rocks "at random thrown,"
and seated herself.
He followed her slowly and with difficulty, and when he
reached her he said, with a smile:
"You perceive that I am not a mountain fawn like you;
I am an amphibious creature of the seashore. If this were
a rowing or a swimming match, now, I might do myself
some credit; but climbing? No! that is not in my line !"
She spoke gravely, without replying to his words:
"Sit down here beside me. From this point we can see
all the desolation around us."
He placed himself beside her, with a suppressed groan;
he could scarcely endure the morbid mood in which he
found her.
"See," she continued, "'the Valley of the Shadow of
Death' lies below us. The shadow of the precipice behind
us has cast the blackness of darkness over the vale; the
thicket of pine trees before us conceals the house and all
the beauty of the grounds below them. 'The abomination of
desolation' is around us."
The young man heard her with pain. He made no
comment; but he thought within himself: This lovely
girl's mind has been devastated by association with that
dark criminal. But never mind! never mind, my darling!
In a little while, please Heaven, I will take you away from
this Hades haunted by devils, and carry you to my own



<pb n="332"/>
382           A TORTURED HEART
beautiful home by the open sea, where you will forget all
these horrors.
After this she sank into silence, and the two sat to- .
gether there for about twenty minutes, without exchanging
as many words.
Then, to his infinite relief, she arose and said, wearily: 
"Let us go home. It is wrong of me to leave my father
alone so long."
She went down from that chaos of rocks as easily as she
had climbed up. He descended with more care and trouble,
and then they crossed the valley, passed through the belt
of pine woods, and entered upon the cultivated grounds ;
around the Hermitage.
They did not linger here, but went immediately into the
house and joined Mr. Elfinstar in the parlor. 
Early in the afternoon the coroner arrived, accompanied
by the regimental surgeon, Dr. Boggs, and the prison physi- 
cian, Dr. Briggs.
Mr. Elfinstar received them gravely, but politely, and 
immediately explained the case upon which he had sum-   ,
moned them.
The three officers decided to view the body together, and 
then to let the surgeons make a post-mortem examination, 5
and report whether an inquest was necessary. 
This they did under the auspices of their host, who con-  ;
ducted them to the cottage, and left them in the death
chamber.
The two doctors conducted the autopsy in the presence
of the coroner, while Mr. Elfinstar and Mr. Hamilton 
Gower remained in the parlor below to hear the result.
The most anxious, perhaps the only anxious person in  .
the house was Hamilton Gower, who dreaded to hear that 
Rice had, after all, died from the effects of his wound.
After two hours the doctors and the coroner came down- -.
stairs, and the two arose to hear the report.
"There is no necessity for an inquest. Hice died from. 
natural causes. I have given a certificate to that effect,"
said Dr. Briggs.
"Was his death in any manner accelerated by the wound 
he received five weeks ago?" anxiously inquired Hamilton. 
Gower.
"Not in the least degree. I have said that the man die'
4'4



<pb n="333"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    S35
from natural causes-from congestion of the brain, as a
matter of detail," replied the surgeon.
"Thank Heaven it was not from the wound!" was the
mental reflection of Hamilton Gower.
Mr. Elfinstar then asked the three officers to go up to
the house and take some refreshments before they should
return to town.
The whole party of gentlemen then left the cottage.
In the dining room of the Hermitage they found a most
inviting collation of cold meats, pastry, cakes, fruit, and
light wines.
The three officers sat down to the table with appetites
whetted by their long ride, and in no degree dulled by the
work they had just gone through.
After their repast-their horses having been fed, watered,
and rested in the meantime-they prepared to return to
Hobart Town.
Mr. Elfinstar requested the surgeon of the prison to send
an undertaker out to the Hermitage, as he meant to give
the body of poor Hice a decent burial at his own cost; for
he could not bear the thought of letting those poor remains
be put into a rude pine box and interred in the convicts'
burial ground.
Dr. Briggs promised to do all that was required of himl,
and the three officers left the Hermitage.
Two days after this the body of poor Hice was taken to
the cemetery of St. George, just out of the city limits, and
laid in a grave under the shade of a great cedar tree.
And life at the Hermitage relapsed to its calm monotony.
Six weeks had now passed since Hamilton Gower first
entered the house of Theobald Elfinstar, and he felt that he
must have an explanation with his host and take his leave.
Just one week from the day on which he had first resolved
to ask an interview with Mr. Elfinstar, for the purpose of
soliciting the hand of his daughter in marriage, and had
been prevented by the announcement of the sudden death
of Hice and by the events that followed it-he decided to
make a second attempt to effect his purpose.
On rising from the table that morning, therefore, he said
to his host:
"Mr. Elfinstar, may I speak to you alone for a few min-
utes?"



<pb n="334"/>
334          A TORTURED HEART
"Certainly, sir !" lifting his ecyebrows with a look of some '
surprise, as he waved his hands toward the door and said:
"Will you walk into the library?"
When the two gentlemen were seated alone together at
the library table and the door was closed, Mr. Elfinstar
waited for a few minutes for his guest to open the subject 
of his business; but as the latter remained silent and some-
what embarrassed, he said:
"Now, Mr. Gower, I am quite at your orders. How can 
I serve you ?"
"My dear sir," began the young man, in a hesitating 
manner, "I came into your house a perfect stranger, without'
any letter of introduction-"
"But bringing my child, whom you had rescued from.'
violence. What better letter of introduction could you need',i
or I require than that ?"
"Oh, sir, any creature wearing the form of man would i
have defended a helpless young lady from injury."
"I am not so sure of that. But, at least, I know that you'
did do so, and laid me under an infinite obligation."
"Let us say no more about that, Mr. Elfinstar. I have, 
been your guest for six weeks, and you have treated me more,.'
as a beloved son of the house than as a stranger." 
"And vou are held even so. Were it consistent witht
ycur interests I should implore you to share our isolation, ,
and brighten it by remaining with us forever, a son of the. 
house. But I know, of course, that your interests and youri,
duty must call you elsewhere sooner or later. I hope it may 
be later, and very much later. I shall mourn the day that;!
takes you from us, Mr. Gower."
"Oh, my dear sir, it rests with your own will to make me'
in fact what you have called me in affection-a son of the.,;
house," said the young gentleman, in a tone of earnestnessl
that caused Mr. Elfinstar to look up in alarm.
"I do not quite understand you, my young friend. YouI
are my son in affection. You might be so really, if, instead
of being rich and powerful, as I suspect you to be, you were
poor and friendless, as many a worthy young gentleman too'
often is."
"Sir, I am neither poor nor friendless; but by one o
those strange caprices of fortune which distributes her gi
without the slightest regard to merits-passing by the g



<pb n="335"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    335
to shower her favors upon the good-f:,r-nothing-I am the
possessor of wealth and rank; were I not so I should not
aspire to be as one of your house. Mr. Elfinstar, I love your
daughter."
"Dear me! dear me! dear me !" sighed the old gentleman,
with a look of dismay.
The young gentleman quickly perceived his disturbance
and hastened to add:
"If I prove to you that in wealth, position, and character
I am not unworthy of Miss Elfinstar's hand, may I hope for
your approval, sir?"
"Dear me! dear me! dear me!" repeated Mr. Elfinstar,
mournfully.
"I trust you do not disapprove my suit, sir," said Ham-
ilton Gower, anxiously.
"Dear me! dear me! dear me! Have you spoken to my
daughter on this subject ?" inquired Mr. Elfinstar, in a tone
of distress.
"Certainly not, sir! I would not do so without your
consent," gravely replied the lover.
"Then do not speak to her of this. Mr. Gower, Seraph
Elfinstar can never marry."
CHAPTER XXXV
THREE LITTLE WORDS
THE young suitor gazed at the old gentleman with in-
credulous surprise for a moment, and then said:
"I beg your pardon-I-I cannot have understood you.
You surely did not mean to tell me-"
"That my daughter must never marry! Yes, Mr. Gower,
that is just what I meant to tell you. Dear me I Ah! dear,
dear me !" sighed the old man at the end of his speech.
"But, sir," impulsively spoke up the young lover, "surely,
surely that is a most cruel and unnatural fate to doom her
to! Miss Elfinstar has youth, health, beauty. Why should
she not marry if the suitor for her hand should prove ac-
ceptable to her and worthy of her? I beg your pardon, sir,



<pb n="336"/>
536           A TORTURED HEART 
if I seem to speak too freely, but my heart is too deeply in-
terested in this question to permit me to keep silence."
"Dear me! Oh, dear me! I am very sorry for this, Mr.
Gower. I hope-ah! I hope that Seraph's heart is not
equally interested."
"Mr. Elfinstar, I told you that I had not breathed a word
of my love or my hopes to Miss Elfinstar, and that I could
never have done so without first gaining your consent; but
I should not be dealing frankly with you if I did not admit
that-I think the young lady has read my heart aright, and 
-without displeasure," modestly added the lover.
"Which is a delicate way of saying that you are not 
without the hope that my daughter has discovered and re- 
ciprocates vour affection," said Mr. Elnstar. 
Hamilton Gower bowed assent, adding:
"We have been too constantly associated together to con-
ceal the state of our feelings from each other." 
"Bless my soul! Bless my soul! I would not have had
this happen for the world! But I might have known it! I
ought to have guarded against it! The fault is mine! It is
mine !" moaned the old man, slowly shaking his gray head.
"Mr. Elfinstar," said the lover, after a thoughtful pause,
"I see how it is, at length. I did not understand you at
first, but now I do. I see the cause of your objection and
I acknowledge its reasonableness." 
The old gentleman raised his head and fixed his mourn- '
ful, dark eyes upon the speaker, who went on to say:
"You receive me here, a nameless adventurer without cre- 
Cdentials. I might be a ticket-of-leave man, or an ex-convict, 
for aught you know to the contrary, yet you receive me here
because I was so fortunate as to rescue your daughter from 
danger, and because, besides, I have something of the man-, 
ner and appearance of a decent bringing up. You admit ,
me, unquestioned, to your house, to your table, to your,
friendship, but there your complacency ends, and very prop- i
erly ends. You do not, and you ought not, to admit my :
suit for your daughter's hand until I have brought you  l
some credentials to prove me worthy of the boon I ask."
"You are mistaken, sir! You are mistaken !" interrupted i
the old man.                                          :?
"No! hear me out !" persisted the lover. "It is very kind 
of you to speak as you do; but I understand you. I caDn,
Y.



<pb n="337"/>
A TORTURED HEART                  8SX
prove myself in wealth, rank, and, what is more important
than all the rest, in personal character, to be not unworthy
of the hand of Miss Elfinstar."
"But, my dear Mr. Gower-my dear sir," put in the old
gentleman, deprecatingly.
"No, no, listen to me! I am going to tell you a secret
which I had intended to keep, as I had good and worthy
reasons for keeping it some months longer, but which I
now tell you as a matter of duty and necessity. This, then,
is my secret: I am really Horace Hawke, sixteenth Earl
of Hawkewood in the peerage of England, and I am trav-
eling under an assumed name for private reasons, in which
there is not the least cause of reproach. All this, Mr. Elfin-
star, I hold myself ready to prove to your own perfect satis-
faction. Now, sir, I will not ask you to receive my immedi-
ate proposals for your daughter; but I do entreat that you
will promise to sanction my suit to Miss Elfinstar as soon
as I shall have proved to your satisfaction that I am in
reality all that I represent myself to be."
"Mr. Gower, I thank you for giving me a chance to slip
in a word 'edgeways' at last," said the old gentleman, with
a look of sad sarcasm in his tone. "And now I wish to
repeat that you are utterly and entirely mistaken in your
premises. I have never doubted your respectability or your
worthiness to aspire to the hand of any young lady upon
whom you may have set your affections. No, strange as it
may seem to you, who set so much value upon 'credentials,'
I have never doubted you. On the contrary, from the first
I have recognized in you a young gentleman of fair moral
and intellectual endowments, and of good rank and culture.
I had no objection to you personally even before you an-
nounced yourself as the Earl of Hawkewood, and I may say
that I have no more, nor no less, now. No, sir, the objec-
tion does not lie against you, but against marriage. I re-
peat, that my daughter must not marry."
"In the name of Heaven, why?" demanded the young
lover.
"You must pardon me for declining to enter into particu-
lars, and-you must accept my decision as final."
"But, my dear sir-"
"Say no more upon this subject, I implore you."



<pb n="338"/>
838          A TORTURED HEART
"Will you not give me a reason for so strange a deter-
mination ?"
"Unfortunately I cannot do so."
"But, gracious Heaven, my dear Mr. Elfinstar - "
"My good young friend, our interview is at an end, and
this subject must never be renewed," said the old man,
rising with an air of dignity.
"Then, sir, I have nothing to do but to bid you good-by,
with many thanks for your hospitality. I leave for Hobart
Town to-day," replied the young gentleman, starting up in
wrath.
"No, no, you must do naught of the sort! Bless my soul,
young sir, do you not suppose-do you not see that if it 
rested with me to do so I would give you my child with
delight, knowing that by so doing I should secure all her
future happiness ? But it does not rest with me to give you '
my daughter, sir," said Mr. Elfinstar, mournfully.
"If not with you, her father, then who, in the name of
Heaven, should it rest with-does it rest with?" demanded 
the lover.
"Fate," answered the father, solemnly. 
The lover gazed on him in silent perplexity.
"Come,"said Mr. Elfinstar, with cordial kindness, "do not
leave us abruptly, as in anger. Remain with us to the end
of the week. You and Seraph are friends who enjoy your  ^
mutual friendship! Continue to be friends! But do not 
seek to be more."
"Mr. Elfinstar, I thank you for your kindness, and I ac- 
cept it. But I tell you frankly that I must have some ex-
planation with Miss Elfinstar. I am bound in honor, no less
than in affection, to do so! Although I have not as vet v.
spoken to her, in so many words, of my love, because I :,
would not have done so without first having sought your 
consent to the measure, yet-a man who loves as I do can- .i
not always control his looks and tones, and mine have be-, 
trayed my feelings and led the young lady to expect from .
me that explicit proposal which I had hoped for your sane-/ ,
tion to make. I have failed to get that sanction, but now  Y
I warn you that I must speak to the young lady herself; I i
must have an understanding with her.".
"Very well, my young friend  I would willingly have 



<pb n="339"/>
A TORTURED HEART                     339
spared you both the pain of such an interview; but go on
and take the consequences!"
"I shall offer my hand to Miss Elfinstar and beg her to
accept my pledge to wait for her and remain faithful to her
until in time we may be so happy as to obtain your consent
to our union !"
"There you go again! I do not withhold my consent to
your marriage! It is not I who separate you! Not I, but
fate! I told you so before! And more, I tell you now,
and I feel safe in telling you this-that if you can gain my
daughter's consent to your marriage, you shall have mine."
"Shall I ? Shall I, indeed ?" exclaimed the lover, starting
up in delight.
"Undoubtedly you shall! But do not count on her con-
sent. My poor, young friend, you can never get it," sighed
the father.
"But I dare to hope that she reciprocates my feelings."
"Very likely, poor child! It was culpable in me to expose
her to such a chance! But as I told you that it was not I,
but fate who is against your union with my daughter, so
now I tell you, also, it will not be she, but fate, who will
pronounce your rejection."
"I will not accept the fiat of fate! If Seraph Elfinstar
loves me enough to take me, she shall be my wife! When
may I speak to her, sir?"
"Now, if you will be so very desperate! You will prob-
ably find her in the garden."
Hamilton Gower seized his hat and rushed out. A new
inspiration had enlightened his mind. He felt sure that he
had now the key of the mystery in the existence of the life
convict, Margaret Campbell.
He concluded, from all the circumstances that had come
to his knowledge, that this Margaret Campbell was a very
near relation of the Elfinstars-perhaps a niece of the old
gentleman and a first cousin of the young lady-who could
tell? And a morbid delicacy determined both father and
daughter never to connect themselves by marriage with any
family, lest the latter should suffer the slightest shadow of
reproach through such connection.
He would soon discover, through Miss Elfinstar, if this
were the case; and if it were, he would know how to combat
and overcome all such sickly objections.



<pb n="340"/>
40Q          A TORTURED HEART
With this generous resolution, he hastened out into the
garden to find Seraph.
He saw her sitting in one of the arbors, mechanically
engaged in an old-fashioned occupation-knitting some-
tling that looked like the leg of a man's white woolen sock.  i
1-He went in and sat down beside her, and then-being
struck with a sudden tremor at the thought of the proposal
he was about to make, he plunged at once into a trivial
subject.
"You appear to be very much interested in your work,
Miss Elfinstar."
"Do I ?" she murmured, languidly, as she drew out one
of the long needles, laid the article she was making on her
lap, and smoothed it out with her slender, white hands. "It J
is one of a pair of mufties for papa. I knit a dozen pair
for him during the summer; he wears them in the winter,"
she added, as she laid her work aside, and gave her whole
attention to her visitor.
"Pray, do not let me interrupt you. Please go on. I can
talk while you knit," he said, thinking, poor lad! that he
could speak with so much more freedom if her eyes were 
on her work, instead of on his face.
"But I am tired of it, really. I was just wishing that I
had something to read, or some one to talk to," she replied.
"Ah! This Mountain Hermitage is a paradise in beauty
and sublimity, in comfort and in luxury; but it is no less
a hermitage, notwithstanding all this; and to one so young
and lovely as its mistress it must seem dull in its unbroken 
monotony," he remarked, with more frankness than polite-
ness-for, as I beg you all always to remember, this young
gentleman, from the isolated manner in which he had been 
brought up under the severe eye of his clerical tutor, knew
as little of the usages of polite society, with its insincere 
courtesies, as if he had been reared in the wilds of New 
Zealand. 
"It is very dull. I am sure you must have found it so,"
answered the young lady, with some little sarcasm.,
"I-I have found it dull?" exclaimed the lover, with a ,!
look and tone of genuine surprise and perfect sincerity 
that must have convinced the most incredulous of his truth-
fulness. "No, indeed, believe me, I have not  Why, Miss  i
Elfinstar, by far the happiest portion of my whole life ha& 
t



<pb n="341"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    341
been the period of the last six weeks spent in this Hermit-
age. So happy have 1 been that even now, when I feel that
it is time, and high time, for me to go away, I seize the
slightest pertext to stay on."
"But you are not going away yet a while. You really
must not leave us for a long time to come. You said that
you had given yourself a two years' leave of absence from
your home in England, of which some seven or eight months
remain. You said you had been all over these colonies, and
had nothing more to see here. Why, then, should you leave
us? I am sure that my father expects and desires you to
remain with us for months longer. But I beg your pardon,
Mr. Gower. I forgjt. This place is 'dull in its unbroken
monotony,'" said Seraph Elfinstar, with some touch of
irony.
"I beg your pardon ! You quote the words I used in ref-
erence to yourself, and in reply to your own observation. I
have assured you-and I beg you to believe me-that I
have found this place the most interesting and delightful I
ever had the privilege of knowing. It was of you alone I
thought-of you, who should be in the world of youth and
beauty to which you properly belong-and to which"-the
youth hesitated, blushed like a maiden, and then continued
in a lower tone-"to which it is my highest ambition and
fondest hope to take you."
She was seized with a sudden tremor, and covered her
face with her hands.
"Miss Elfinstar," he resumed.
"Oh, don't! don't !" she pleaded, in an agonized tone.
"But, my dear young lady-"
"Ah, hush! You know not what you say! You know
not what you do!"
"Miss Elfinstar, I must speak. Your father has given me
permission to speak to you on this subject which is so near
my heart that my whole life's happiness is involved in it!
Your father, I say, has authorized me to speak to you."
"My father-my father has done this?' Oh! how could
he have done so !" wailed the girl, swaying herself back and
forth in great trouble.
"Why should he not? I gave him satisfactory evidence
that I was not unworthy to become your-- " he was say-
ing; but she interrupted him with an exclamation:



<pb n="342"/>
342          A TORTURED HEART
Oil! it is not that! It is no question of your worthiness
at all! Oh ! how could my dear father have sent you to me
on any such vain, distressing errand? I do not understand
it! 1 do not!"
He sank down beside her and took her hands, that now
lay limp upon her lap, leaving her pallid face exposed, and
he sail, in gentle, pleading tones:
"1 love you! 1 love you! You are the first to whom I
have ever spoken these words: '1 love you,' and you will
be the last and only one to whom I will ever speak them!
They bear my heart's life upon them. Have they no worth
at all with you?"
She looked down on him with a vwistful, mournful ex-
pression in her dark-blue eyes, and repeated in a thrilling,
pathetic voice:
"Have those words no value for me?   Oh! they have
inestimable value! They are precious beyond price! The 
memory of them will keep me from dying or maddening in
the long, lonely life path that stretches out before me across
the desert of this world. I thank you for them! I bless
you for them !"
"But-you do not love me for them? And love is all I
want," he pleaded.
"Oh, yes, yes, yes! I love you for them! Ah! I loved
you before they were spoken! You know it well! I love
you for them ! But-that is all that I can do !"
"Miss Elfinstar-dearest Seraph-may I call you so?"
"Ah, yes, you may call me anything you please."
"Then I will call you 'wife,'" he whispered, in a tender,
reverential tone.
"Anything but that! Anything but that! You must
never, never call me that !" she answered, with bitter energy.
"Does your prohibition apply to all the world as well as
to me?" he inquired.
"To all the world! Yes, to all the world !"
"Dearest Seraph, your father more than hinted what
your words imply-that some real or fancied obstacle exists
to your marriage. Is such the case?"
"Yes, an insurmountable obstacle," she answered, with a
sigh of profound regret that she did not even attempt to
repress.
"Ah! but there can be no obstacle-none-that I will not



<pb n="343"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    343
surmount in order to win you!" he answered, with en-
thusiasm; for he was again thinking that the degradation
of Margaret Campbell, the convict murderess, and the prob-
ably near relation of the Elfinstars, was the obstacle of
which she spoke, and which he intended to sweep away with
a word.
As she did not reply to his warm declaration, he repeated
it with more energy:
"Did you hear me say that there is no possible obstacle
that I will not surmount to win you ?"
"I heard you say so; you speak wildly, madly," she said,
with such a bitter smile that there darted through his brain
a new suspicion, which he hastened to express:
"I mean, of course, to except an existing previous mar-
riage, or previous attachment; either of which I should rec-
ognize as an 'insurmountable obstacle.'"
"Do you mean on my part?" she inquired, with the same
bitter smile.
"I mean on your part, of course. What else should I
mean ?"
"Truly! But there has been no 'previous marriage or at-
tachment' in my case, nor any possibility of either. I have
been set apart from love or from marriage since my child-
hood."
"Great Heaven !" he exclaimed, awed by the solemnity of
her tone. "You are not a nun, nor an idiot, nor an invalid !
You are a young, healthy, and beautiful girl! By what or
by whom, then, have you been set apart?"
"By fate," she answeerd.
"That is what your father told me-not his will, but that
of fate divided us ! And now I say to you what I said to
him-that fate shall not divide us! Since I adore you,
since you love me, since your father approves me, since no
prior marriage or attachment bars the way, fate shall not
have the power to divide us, nor the insolence to attempt it.
If you will accept me for your husband, I will make you my
wife and bear you off to England in spite of fate!" he ex-
claimed, with earnest enthusiasm.
Again that bitter smile.
'You are still incredulous. You do not believe me. You
cannot trust me. But I tell you, for all that, I defy fate 



<pb n="344"/>
844           A TORTURED HEART
I will conquer fate! If you will consent, I will carry you ,
off to England as my wife!"'
"I would give my consent, but that consent would only 
mock you by its uselessness. You could not marry me and
take me home to England, no, not if we all wished it ever  '
so much; not if I consented ever so eagerly, you could not 
do so if all our lives depended on your doing it! I tell you, 
fate-inexorable fate-immutable fate, divides us now and
must divide us forever !" 
CHAPTER XXXVI
THE HIDDEN WOE!
"AND now I think I know the name of that Fate " said
the young man, firmly.
Seraph looked up in some alarm.
"Her name is Margaret Campbell! But she shall not
divide us !"
The young girl shivered, clasped her hands, dropped her
head upon her bosom and moaned.
"There! I knew it! I knew that Margaret Campbell      '
was the obstacle! Your father has immolated himself and
his daughter, in sacrifice to this Margaret Campbell! And
is she worth it ?"
"She is innocent!" moaned the girl.
"You say so, doubtless you think so, and I will not con-  '
tradict you! But why should your father, and especially 4
you, be sacrificed for her ? What is she to you ?"
"Do not ask me!"
"I should not but that our mutual love gives me the
right! And still I should not use that right were not the 
question a necessary preliminary to what I am about to 'i
urge. Therefore I must press the question-what is this  I
unhappy girl to you? Is she a near relation ?"
"She is-a very near-relation to-my father," mur-      i
mured the girl, with pallid lips, in an expiring tone. 
"A near relation to your father, and consequently to you.
That is just what I wished to arrive at, my dear and hon- i'
orable love! For without the certain knowledge of that fact
I could not say to you what I say now-that as you are in
no degree responsible for the evils and misfortunes in Mar-
,.t ~~



<pb n="345"/>
A TORTURED HEART                   84
garet Campbell's life, you should not feel obliged to suffer
for them. You should not permit the facts to hinder you
from accepting the hand of the man who is so happy as to
love and to be beloved by you."
"Would you"-she murmured, in the faint and gasping
utterance of a dying person-"would you really-wish to
marry-a woman-connected with-Margaret Campbell?"
"I wish to marry you, be you connected with-no matter
whom !"
"If I were-Margaret Campbell's sister?"
He started abruptly before he could control himself; but
quickly recovering his composure, he answered, calmly:
"It would not be your fault."
"And you would really marry a sister of Margaret Camp-
bell ?"
"If you were that sister, yes! But I should take you far
away from these colonies, back to England, where the name
of Margaret Campbell is forgotten, and where it never shall
be mentioned in your presence, or in mine. And that is
what I wish to do, dear Seraph! You are not her sister, I
think, for if I remember rightly, Margaret Campbell was
an only child, and an orphan; consequently you could not
be her sister; but you say she is a very near relation to your
father, and of course to you. She may be his niece and
your first cousin. I presume she is so?" he concluded, in
a slightly interrogatory manner.
Miss Elfinstar made no reply, and he took it for granted
that he was right in his conjecture, and he continued:
"If she is so nearly connected with Mr. Elfinstar, and so
well beloved by him that he has expatriated himself and has
come out to this savage country for the sake of ameliorating
her penal servitude by taking her into his family, he can,
having her near him, all the better spare you, whom he
should not doom to a life of isolation. Once more! I love
you! Will you be my wife and return with me to civiliza-
tion and society?"
"But your family?" she suggested.
"I have no family. I am alone in the world! And now
I thank God that I have no one to interfere with me! My
nearest relative is a distant cousin. with whom I have an
inherited feud! Come, now! place your hand in mine, in
token of acceptance!"



<pb n="346"/>
846          A TORTURED HEART
And so saying, he held out his in pleading.
"No, no! it cannot, cannot be " she sighed. 
"What cannot be? what ?" he demanded, refusing to un.
derstand her.
"Our marriage can never be!"
"Then you do not care for me?"
"Oh, I do! I do! Heaven knows how much !" she cried,
in a voice of anguish and with a brow of agony, as she
wrung and twisted her white and slender fingers. "The
thought of giving you up, of parting with you, is more ter-
rible to me than the thought of death-the rending asunder
of body and soul !"
"Then why do you give me up? Why do you part with
me, only to blight the lives of both of us?"
"Because I cannot help it! Oh, indeed, I cannot help it !:
I would so gladly if I could !"
"I thought I had set aside the only obstacle to our union
-Margaret Campbell     But it seems there is another!
What can it be?"
"Mr. Gower, you shall know the whole truth ! If it breaks 
my heart to tell it, you shall know it all the same! It is j
your right. You have been so frank, so straightforward 
and confiding in yourself that nothing should be, or shall
be, kept from you !"                                  i
"I am ready to listen, I am most anxious to hear. There
is nothing you can tell me, I am sure, that will not redound
to your honor !"
"Let me know, then! and let me judge!"
"Yes, you shall know and judge!"                   i
"Begin, then! I am consumed with impatience to have
this new obstacle set up only that I may knock it down!
Speak, Seraph! Tell me at once all you have to communi-
cate."
"Ah! not now, or here! I could not tell you the story 
face to face! Listen, Mr. Gower. Some time ago, in a 
crisis of my life, when I thought I was going to die, I wrote
out all the facts for the satisfaction of the friends that loved
me. I have that manuscript by me now. When you are 
about to leave us I will give it into your hands, and when 
you shall have read it you will see how impossible it is that >
I should ever have the happiness of being your wife, or even
of returning to my native country. Forgive me for the'



<pb n="347"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    347
cowardice that prevents my telling you face to face, and
subjects you to the trouble of reading a manuscript."
"I will restrain my impatience until I get hold of that
'script. Then I will judge for myself. And then I will
return and claim your hand. For in giving me this revela-
tion you will only set up an obstacle for me to overthrow !"
"You think so!"
"I know it! Ah, young lady! You are like the beauties
in the tales of chivalry. You delight to set your lovers hard
tasks by which to prove their valor and their devotion!
You have set me such tasks! Very well! I will prove
worthy of your trust !" he said, in a tone of gravity entirely
free from the slightest apprehension.
But his words won no smile from the pallid lips of Seraph
Elfinstar, who, seeming to feel that the whole scene had
been too trying to her nervous system, now arose and said:
"Let us return to the house."
He arose and gave her his arm, and she took it without
hesitation, for she was pale and faint.
When they reached the house she went immediately to her
room, and did not reappear until dinner.
He went into the library to seek Mr. Elfinstar.
He found the old gentleman seated in his armchair, en-
gaged in reading.
"Well, my young friend, you have spoken to my daugh-
ter ?" inquired the latter, laying down his book.
"Yes, I have spoken to her," replied the suitor, as he
sank into a chair.
"And what does Seraph say?"
"Very much what you yourself said, sir-that there is
an obstacle. I know not what the nature of that obstacle
is; but, since it is not your disapproval, nor her dislike, nor
any prior marriage or engagement on her part, I mean to
overthrow that obstacle!"
"Ah, my young Don Quixote de la Mancha, there are
giants that your lance can never overthrow," sighed the old
gentleman.
"We will see. We will see," said Hamilton Gower, con-
fdently.
He would have had an explanation with Mr. Elfinstar in
regard to Margaret Campbell, but he remembered the prom-



<pb n="348"/>
348          A TORTURED HEART
ise that he had made to Seraph some weeks before, never to 
mention that name in the presence of her father.
After a few moments, he said:
"I leave for Hobart Town early to-morrow morning; but 
with your permission, I shall return to see you in a very
few daya."
"I shall always be pleased to see you, Mr. Gower. Your 
visit has been a boon to us," cordially replied his host.
"You are very kind to say so. I know that the six weeks :'i
that I have passed under your hospitable roof have been
the happiest of my whole life !" 
"How pleasant it is to hear you say that! Well, give us
as much of your company in the future as you possibly can,
my young friend," said the old gentleman, heartily. Then, 
taking up a pile of papers from the table beside him, he i
said: "Here are the latest mails from London. Stackpole 
brought them from town an hour ago. They come by the 
Norfolk, which reached port yesterday. Here is the London
Times, only five months old, and with all the latest news-  :
to us," he added, with a smile.
Hamilton Gower took up the paper and looked over it. 
By what seemed the merest accident, his eyes lighted on ;
the column of "Births, Marriages, and Deaths," and the '
very first item immediately caught his attention:
"At Hawke Hall, Cornwall, on Monday, the second in-"'
stant, the Countess of Hawkewood of a son and heir."
"Indeed!" mentally ruminated Mr. Hamilton Gower.'
"Who in the deuce is the Countess of Hawkewood?   So'
Mr. Lewis Manton imagines himself to be an earl, has taken,
unto himself a countess, and even provided himself with M
son and heir ! Well, I hope the 'Countess of Hawkewood',
and the infant Viscount Hawke are both as well as can
expected. Will there not be something like a disagreeable
surprise somewhere about the first of next September I Butz
dormez tranquille, madame et messieurs, several month* d
must elapse before the deluge, and somebody may die or 
shipwrecked on his way home to England."
This gave the young man so much food for thought that!
he scarcely uttered another word during his stay in the',
library.



<pb n="349"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    849
Mr. Elfinstar had resumed his book, and seemed quite
absorbed over it.
Hamilton Gower, with his eyes fixed upon that para-
graph, brooded over it.
"I wonder what woman that dandy found who was idiot
enough to marry him? Oh, but he was supposed to be an
earl, to be sure! Some woman sold herself for a coronet.
Well, I am sorry for the poor woman, who, if she did sell
herself for a price, certainly ought to get the price, but who
certainly will get nothing but disappointment! And I am
sorry for the child, who is innocent! Well, the little fellow
may be my heir, after all, for if my Seraph does not marry
me-well I I will certainly endeavor to outlive Lewis Man-
ton, if only to keep him from the estate, but I will die a
bachelor, and let that baby succeed me."
As he thus ruminated, he ran his eyes carelessly down
the column, and, catching sight of the first name in the
death list, exclaimed:
"Hello! What is this?"
What, indeed?
Here is the paragraph:
"At Hawke Hall, Cornwall, on Tuesday, the third in-
stant, Volante, Countess of Hawkewood, in the twenty-first
year of her age."
"Poor, poor, young lady!" muttered the reader, compas-
sionately. "Volante? Volante? That must have been
Lady Volante Belle Isle, the black-haired beauty with whom
I waltzed at my birthnight ball, and with whom I was
somewhat taken, but not enough to keep me from running
away! Well, I should have thought she would have had
more spirit than to have married that fellow Manton! But
I dare say it was her mother's influence-'Preaching down
a daughter's heart,' and so on! And now! what is this?
Whew! Death has been busy at Hawke Hall !"
His eyes had fallen on a short paragraph immediately
below that which announced the demise of the young Count-
ess of Hawkewood.
It was as follows:
"At Hawke Hall, Cornwall, on Tuesday, the third in-



<pb n="350"/>
850           A TORTURED HEART
stant, Lewis Charles Henry, Viscount Hawke, aged one
day, infant son and heir of Lewis, seventeenth Earl of
Hawkewood."
"Poor baby! Poor young mother! Heavens! what an
uncertain thing is human life! But, after all, are they
not mlucil happier to have died-the mother in her early 
youth, the boy in his earliest infancy-than to have lived
a long life under the precious rule of the admirable Mr. 
Manton? I must get back to England before that gentle- 
man's year of mourning has expired, or he has had a chance
of beguiling another young lady by means of his false 
rank and title! Ah ! what is rank, wealth, or title, in a world
where life is so uncertain? Where few that are born live
to grow up ? Where fewer, still, live to middle age, and not
one in a thousand to old age?" 
So deeply moved was the young man by what he had
just read, that he did not care to examine the other por-
tions of the paper at all, but he remained buried in grave
thought until he was startled by the ringing of the dressing
bell. 
"Dear me! How time flies!" exclaimed Mr. Elfinstar,
laying down his book and taking off his spectacles.
Both gentlemen left the library and repaired to their
rooms to dress for dinner, for this ceremony was observed
in the Mountain Hermitage as punctiliously as in Belgravia 
or the Champs de l'Elysee.
At dinner, Hamilton Gower again met Seraph Elfinstar.
Not the slightest allusion was made by either of the three :
to the interviews of the morning. Only Mr. Elfinstar re-
marked: 
"Our esteemed guest insists on leaving us to-morrow 
morning! And-unfortunately-as we live in the nine- 
teenth century, I have no power to prevent him I I do not i
live in a castle, as my remote ancestors did. I cannot detain '
a guest, or prisoner, as one of them might have done, by'"a
thundering forth the order of the old Douglass of Angns: .
'Uip drawbridge, grooms! What, warder, ho 
Let the portcullis fall !'                    ,
for we haven't any castle, and drawbridge, any portcullis, .
or any warder; no, nor any grooms to speak of, saving &*V



<pb n="351"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    351
few stableboys to help our old coachman; so if our guest
will go he must go!"
3Mr. Hamilton Gower laughed at the quotation and the
commentary, saying:
"Though I go away to-morrow, I shall come back so.
very often that the only order you may have to issue will
be to your porter, never admit 'that person.'"
"Meaning you?"
"Meaning me."
"Try us, my young friend! We will stand the testl"
said Mr. Elfinstar, with a smile.
Seraph, through all this light "chaffing," which looked
less like cheerfulness than in effort to be cheerful, preserved
the pensiveness of her mood. She could not rally her spirits
at all. Her utmost powers of self-command only insured
her calmness. 
When dinner was over, the old gentleman proposed a
game of whist in the drawing room.
"It will be the very last chance I shall have to enjoy my
favorite rubber, for-no one knows how long! I will take
'dummy,' and you two can play together. Even with 'dum-
my' for a partner, I shall be more than a match for you
both," he said, as he took a pack of cards from his table
drawer in the library, and led them to the drawing room.
And he was much more than a match for the two absent-
minded young folks, who could not confine their attention
to the game.
He won the "rub" three times in succession, and got up
from the table triumphant and joyful.
Age is often as easily pleased as infancy.
Tea was served in the drawing room, and after it was
over they had music. Hamilton and Seraph sang a duet
from Norma, the young lady playing the accompaniment on
the piano.
At length they bade each other good-night, and separated
to their several chambers.
Hamilton Gower passed a sleepless night. He was
harassed with doubts and fears concerning the revelation
that had been promised him by Seraph Elfinstar.
Again and again he said to himself that there could be
nothing in that revelation that should forbid his marriage
with his beloved.



<pb n="352"/>
352       A TORTURED HEART
Again and again he repeated, that, since the father ap-
proved him, and the daughter loved him, and there had
been no prior marriage nor engagement, nor even attach-
ment, on the part of the young lady, therefore, there could
be no possible bar to their union.
Again and again he ridiculed the idea of the existence of
the convict girl, Margaret Campbell, and her relationship
-to the Elfinstars being any objection to his union with
Seraph. He had nobody to consult but himself, fortunately,
and no one to offend.
Besides-he reminded himself-Margaret Campbell was
no very near relation to them, after all. The convict girl
was an only child and an orphan, without father or mother,
sister or brother; therefore, she could only be the niece of
the old gentleman, and the cousin of the young lady, whose
family name she did not even bear.
"Nonsense!" he muttered, to his pillow. "The idea of
that girl's fall being an obstacle to a young lady's mar-
riage ! I will wed my Seraph! I will make her the Count-
ess of Hawkewood, and take her home to Hawke Hall, where
she shall reign over me and my domain, whose people will
adore her for her goodness and her beauty. But, in one
respect, I mean to be an inexorable tyrant. I will never
permit the name or existence of Margaret Campbell to be
uttered or alluded to in my home ! If Mr. Elfinstar-who is
insane on the subject-chooses to stay out here in Pande-
monium for the sake of the convict girl, he must do so, and
I hope her society may console him for his self-renunciation.
But I shall, after I am married, make it an absolute condi-
tion of his writing to my wife, that he never mentions the
name, or alludes to the existence, of the convict in any of
his letters. My wife must forget that there ever was such
a person as Margaret Campbell."
He raised himself up in bed, shook and beat and turned
his heated pillow, and lay down again and tried to sleep;
but in vain, for the thought of Margaret Campbell, the bice
noire of the Elfinstar family, sat like a nightmare upon hinm
Sunrise found him wide awake.
lie arose to prepare for his ride to Hobart To:-n. T7"
resolved to start immediately after breakfast, that he m ight.



<pb n="353"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    353
sooner receive the manuscript from Seraph, and get to some
quiet room in the Royal Albert Hotel, where he would shut
himself in, open the scroll, and penetrate the mystery of
the revelation she had promised.
He dressed himself quickly, and went downstairs and out
into the stable yard.
He was so much at home in the Mountain Hermitage
that he always felt at liberty to give an order to the serv-
ants.
He found old Jonas Stackpole, who was the head groom
as well as the coachman, busy among his satellites-some
three or four half-grown stableboys.
He directed the old man to have his horse at the house
door immediately after the family breakfast, to take him
to Hobart Town.
"Not going to leave us, I hope, sir," said the coachman.
"Only for a day or two. I shall come back very often,"
pleasantly replied the young gentleman.
"I hope so, sir! The place is brighter for your presence."
"Thank you, Stackpole," said Mr. Gower, slipping a sov-
ereign into the hand of the man, who touched his forehead
in acknowledgment (f the "tip."
"And distribute these among the boys," he added, put-
ting four half crowns to the sovereign.
The coachman saluted again, and the young gentleman
walked off, and sauntered through the grounds, now fresh,
fragrant, and beautiful in the glory of the morning dew
and sunshine.
He remained out until the first breakfast bell rang, when
he turned and entered the house, hoping to see Seraph.
None of the family, however, was down as yet.
.He went out again, and seated himself on the piazza,
leaving the hall door open that he might see Seraph when
she should come down the stairs.
He looked out before him over the vast panorama of
mountain and valley, lake, river, and forest scenery rolled
out below, and glittering in the dewy freshness of the early
morning.
He had not very long to beguile his impatience with the
view of magnificent scenery.



<pb n="354"/>
8541          A TORTURED HEART
He soon perceived the approach of Seraph, with some fine
sympathy that was independent of sight and hearing, for his
face was still toward the outer view, and he neither saw nor
heard her, when he felt that she was coming, and started
up and went in to greet her.
He met her at the foot of the stairs.
She looked pale and heavy-eyed as if she, too, had passed
a sleepless night.
She greeted her lover with a faint, sweet, sad smile, and
said:
"Come out onto the piazza; I have something to give
you."
She led the way, and he followed her. They sat down
together on one of the benches.
She drew a little roll of manuscript from her pocket and
handed it to him, saying:
"This will give you the whole truth. I know not how
you will receive it; but-I have suffered so fearfully and so
long already, and am so inured to pain, that-whatever the
end may be-believe me, I can bear it and still live !" she
added, with a look of patient resignation that seemed al-
most to break his heart.
"I tell you what the end will be, beloved! To-morrow
morning will find me at your feet again, from which I will
never arise until I have your promise to become my wife."
The second bell rang, and the old gentleman came out
to join them.
He greeted his guest with cordiality, and said:
"Come, come; coffee does not improve by standing ! Give
her your arm, Mr. Gower, and let us go to breakfast."
They went in, and sat down to the table, where the young
hostess poured out the coffee and the aged host served the
ham and muffins, and did all that he could besides to render
this parting meal a cheerful one.
Just as they had finished breakfast, old Jonas Stackpole
came and announced Mr. Gower's horse as at the door.
"And I must leave you, now, to return, I hope, within a
very short time," said the young gentleman, offering his
hand to his host.
"The sooner the better, as you know very well, young
man," responded the latter, heartily.



<pb n="355"/>
A TORTURED HEART                    855
Again the departing guest spoke of the kindness of their
hospitality, and the happiness he had found under their
roof, as he turned from his host to bid good-by to his
hostess.
"Until to-morrow," he found an opportunity of whisper-
ig to Seraph.
But she sadly shook her head, and so they parted.
His horse was strong and fresh, the morning was clear
and cool, the road, after he had descended the mountain and
entered upon the highway, was excellent, so that he made
such good time as to reach Hobart Town before noon.
He rode immediately up to the Royal Albert, gave his
horse to a hostler, and entered the office, where he engaged
a suite of apartments consisting of parlor, chamber, and
bathroom, on the first floor. He declined the offered re-
freshments, and hastened up to his apartments, where he
dismissed the waiter, locked the door, threw himself into
an armchair, and drew Seraph Elfinstar's manuscript from
his pocket.
He was in a perfect fever of anxiety to penetrate its mys-
tery I
When he had torn off the neat wrapper that covered it, he
found a little pink note directed to himself, tied around the
roll with a bit of white ribbon.
Smiling softly to himself at the thought of the dainty fin-
gers that had so deftly done up this parcel, he untied the
ribbon, laid aside the manuscript, and retained the note.
Still smiling, he unfolded it and began to read it.
Heaven I What was it that caused him to start and shake
that note off his hand as if it had been an asp that bad
stung him ? What was it that curdled his blood in his veins,
turned his cheeks to the hue of death, and threw him back
in his chair, as near fainting as a strong young man
could be?
It was this:
"Before you begin to read my narrative, you must know
this in explanation: Mr. Elfinstar is not my father, but my
grandfather, and I am Margaret Campbell."
The effect of this remarkable disclosure and the full story
of Margaret Campbell's life will be told in another volume,



<pb n="356"/>
550          A TORTURED HEART
bound in handsome cloth binding, uniform with this vol-
ume, under the title of "The Test of Love."
THE END OF "A TORTURED HEART."
(PART I, "THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT.")
THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT.
:(PART I.)
THE TEST OF LOVE.
(TPART HI, "THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT.")



<pb n="1"/>
Good Fiction Worth Reading.
A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the field
of historical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and diplonmacy
that excel in thrilling and absorbing interest.
A COLONIAL FREE-LANCE. A story of American Colonial Times. By
Chauncey C. Hotchkiss. Cloth, x2mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson
Davis. Price, $S.o0
A book that appeals to Americans as a vivid picture of Revolutionary
scenes. The story is a strong one, a thrilling one. It causes the true
American to flush with excitement, to devour chapter after chapter, until
the eyes smart, and it fairly smokes with patriotism. The love story is h
singularly charming idyL
THE TOWER OF LONDON. AHistoricalRomanceoftherimesof Iady
Jane Grey and Mary Tudor. By Wm. Harrison Ainsworth. Cloth, x2mo. with
four illustrations by George Cruikshank. Price, $,.o.
This romance of the "Tower of London" depicts the Tower as palace,
prison and fortress, with many historical associations. The era is the
middle of the sixteenth century.
The story is divided into two parts, one dealing with Lady Jane Grey,
and the other with Mary Tudor as Queen, introducing other notable char-
acters of the era. Throughout the story holds the interest of the reader
In the midst of intrigue and conspiracy, extending considerably over *
half a century.
IN DEFIANCE OF THE RING. A Romance of the AmericanRevolution.
By Chauncey C Hotchlkss. Cloth, x2mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson
Davis. Price, $x.oo
Mr. Hotchkiss has etched in burning words a story of Yankee bravery,
and true love that thrills from beginning to end, with the spirit of the
Revolution. The heart beats quickly, and we feel ourselves taking a
part in the exciting scenes described. His whole story is so absorbing
that you will sit up far into the night to finish it. As a love romaaoe
It Is charming.
GARTHOWEN. A story of a Welsh Homestead. By Allen aine. Cloth,
mo. with four illustrations by '. Watson Davis. Price, $i.oo
"This is a little idyl of humble life and enduring love, laid bare before
us, very real and pure, which in its telling shows us some strong points of
'Welsh character-the pride, the hasty temper, the quick dying out of wrath.
. . We call this a well-written story, Interesting alike through Its
romance and its glimpses into another life than ours.  A delightful and
clever picture of Welsh village life. The result Is excellent."-Detroit Free
Press
MIFANWY. The story of a Welsh Singer.       By Allan Raine.  Cloth,
irnm. with four illustrations by J. Watson Davis. Price, $x.oo
'Thls is a love story, simple, tender and pretty as one would care to
read. The action throughout is brisk and pleasing; the characters, It is ap-
parent at once, are as true to life as though the author had known them
all personally. Simple In all its situations, the story is worked up in that
touching and quaint strain which never grows wearisome, no matter how
often the lights and shadows of love are introduced. It rings true, and
does not tax the imagination."-Boston Herald.
Fr sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the pub.
isher, A. L. BURT COMPANY, 5a-58 Duane St., New York,



<pb n="2"/>
Good Fiction Worth Reading.
A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the feld
of hitorical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and diplonmac
that excel in thrilling and absorbing interet.
DARNLEY. A Romance of the times of Henry VII. and Cardinal Wolsey.
By G. P. R. James. Cloth, z2mo. with four illustrations by J. Watson Davis
rice, $1.00.
In point of publication, "Darnley" is that work by Mr. James which
follows "Richelleu," and, if rumor can be credited, it was owing to the ad-
vice and Insistence of our own Washington Irvlng that we are Indebted
primarily for the story, the young author questioning whether he could
properly paint the difference In the characters of the two great cardinals.
And it is not surprising that James should have hesitated; he had been
eminently successful in giving to the world the portrait of Richelieu as a
man, and by attempting a similar task with Wolsey as the theme, was
much like tempting fortune. Irving insisted that "Darnley" came natur-
ally in sequence, and this opinion being supported by Sir Walter Scott,
the author set about the work.
As a historical romance "Darnley" is a book that man be taken u
pleasurably again and again, for there is about It that subtle eharm which
those who are strangers to the works of . P. t. James have elsimed was
only to be imparted by Duma.
If there was nothing more about the work to attract espeelal attentc.
the account of the meeting of the kings on the historic field of the cloth of
gold" would entitle the story to the most favorable consideration of every
reader.
There is really but little pure romance in this story, for the author han
taken care to imagine love passages only between those whom history han
credited with having entertained the tender passion one for another, an
he succeeds in making such lovers as all the world must love.
CAPTAIN BRAND, OP THE SCHOONER CENTIPEDE. By Lieut
Hery A. Wise, U. 8 N. (Harry Gringo). Cloth, izmo with four llMutr~
tions by J. Watson Davis. Price, $r.o.
The re-publication of this story will please those lovers of sea yar
who delight in so much of the salty flavor of the ocean as can come through
the medium of a printed page, for never has a story of the sea and those
"who go down In ships" been written by one more familiar with the scene
depicted.
The one book of this gifted author which is best remembered, and which
will be read with pleasure for many years to come, in "Captain Brand,"
who, as the author states on his title page, was a "pirate of eminence mt
the West Indies." As a sea story pure and simple, "Captain Brand" has
never been excelled and as a story of piratical life, told without the usal
embellishments of blood and thunder, it has no equal
NICK OF THE WOODS. Astory ofthe Early SettlersofKentucky. By
Robert Montgomery Bird. Cloth, l2mo. with four illustrations by J. Watso
Davis. Price, $.oa.
This most popular novel and thrilling story of early frontler life t
Kentucky was originally published in the year 188. The novel, long out of
print, had in its day a phenomenal sale, for its realistic presentatlon of
Indian and frontier life in the early days of settlement in the South, nar-
rated In the tale with all the art of a practiced writer. A very charming
love romance runs through the story. This new and tasteful edition of
"Nick of the Woods" will be oertain to make many new admirers for
this enchanting story from Dr. Bird's clever and versatile pen.
]or sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the p
Ulshr, A. L. BURT COMPANY, D'58 Duao St., New York.



<pb n="3"/>
Good Fiction Worth Reading.
: A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the field
of historical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and diplomacy
that excel In thrilling and absorbing interest.
GUY FAWKBS. A Romance of the Gunpowder Treason. By Wm. Rarri-
son Ainsworth. Cloth, izmo. with four illustrations by George Cruikaank.
Price, $i.00
The "Gunpowder Plot" was a modest attempt to blow up Parliament,
the King and his Counsellors. James of Scotland, then King of England,
was weak-minded and extravagant   He hit upon the efficient scheme of
extorting money from the people by imposing taxes on the Catholics. In
their natural resentment to this extortion, a handful of bold spirits con-
cluded to overthrow the government. Finally the plotters were arrested,
and the King put to torture Guy Fawkes and the other prisoners with
royal vigor. A very Intense love story runs through the entire romano.
THB 8PIRIT OF THE BORDER. A Romance of the Brly Settlers in the
Ohio Valley. By Zane Grey. Cloth. Tmo. with four illustrations by J. Watsom
Davis  Price, $.oo.
A book rather out of the ordinary Is this "Spirit of the Border." The
main thread of the story has to do with the work of the Moravian mis-
iaonaris in the Ohio Valley. Incidentally the reader is given details of the
frontier life of those hardy pioneers who broke the wilderness for the plant-
ing of this great nation. Chief among these, as a matter of course, ti
Lewis Wetzel, one of the most peculiar, and at the same time the most
admirable of all the brave men who spent their lives battling with the
aavage toe, that others might dwell in comparative security.
Details of the establishment and destruction of the Moravian "Vlllage
of Peace" are given at some length, and with minute description. The
efforts to Christianize the Indians are described as they never have been
before, and the author has depicted the characters of the leaders of the
several Indian tribes with great care, which of itself will be of interest td
the student.
By no means least among the charms of the story are the vivfd word-
pictures of the thrilling adventures, and the intense paintings of the beau-
ties of nature, as seen in the almost unbroken forests.
It is the spirit of the frontier which is described, and one can by it
perhaps, the better understand why men, and women, too, willingly brave
every privation and danger that the westward progress of the star of em-
pire might be the more certain and rapid. A love story, simple and tender.
runs through the book.
RICHELIEU. A tale of Prance in the reign of King touls  m  By . P.
IL James. Cloth, lnmo with four llustrations by J. Watson Davis. Price, .oc,
In 829 Mr. James published his first romance, "Richelieu," and wa
recognized at once as one of the masters of the craft.
In this book he laid the story during those later days of the great car-
.inal's life, when his power was beginning to wane, but while it was
yet sufficiently strong to permit now and then of Olcanic outbursts which
overwhelmed foes and carried friends to the topmost wave of prosperity.
One of the most striking portions of the story is that of Cnq Mar's conspir-
acy; the method of conducting criminal cases, and the political trickery
resorted to by royal favorites, affording a better Insight Into the state-
craft of that day than can be had even by an exhaustive study of history.
It is a powerful romance of love and diplomacy, and in point of thrilling
and absorbing interest has never been excelled.
For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the p
lisher, A. L, BURT COMPANY,      58 Duae St, New YoCk,



<pb n="4"/>
Good Fiction Worth Reading. 
A series of romances containing several of the old favorites in the field
of historical fiction, replete with powerful romances of love and diplomacy
that excel in thrilling and absorbing interest.
WINDSOR CASTLE. A Historical Romance of the Reignof Henry VII.,
Catharine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn. By Wm. hlarrison Ainsworth. Cloth,
anmo. with four illustrations by George Cruikshank. Price, $1.0o.
"Windsor Castle" is the story of Henry VIII., Catharine, and Anne
Boleyn. "Bluff King Hal," although a well-loved monarch, was none too
good a one in many ways. Of all his selfishness and unwarrantable acts.
none was more discreditable than his divorce from Catharine, and his mar-
tiage to the beautiful Anne Boleyn. The King's love was as brief as it
evas vehement. Jane Seymour, waiting maid on the Queen, attracted him.
and Anne Boleyn was forced to the block to make room for her successor.
This romance is one of extreme interest to all readers.
HORSESHOE ROBINSON. A tale of the Tory Ascendency in South Caro-
lina in 178o. By John P. Kennedy. Cloth, x2mo. with four illustrations by J.
Watson Davis. Price, $i.oo.
Among the old favorites in the field of what is known as historical fic-
tion, there are none which appeal to a larger number of Americans than
Horseshoe Robinson, and this because it is the only story which deplcts
with fidelity to the facts the heroic efforts of the colonists in South Caro-
lina to defend their homes against the brutal oppression of the British
under such leaders as Cornwallis and Tarleton.
The reader is charmed with the story of love which forms the thread
of the tale, and then impressed with the wealth of detail concerning those
times. The picture of the manifold sufferings of the people, is never over-
drawn, but painted faithfully and honestly by one who spared neither
time nor labor in his efforts to present in this charming love story all that
price in blood and tears which the Carolinians paid as their share Ia the
winning of the republic.
Take it all in all, "Horseshoe Robinson" is a work which should be
found on every book-shelf not only because it is a most entertaining
story. but because of the wealth of valuable information concerning the
colonists which It contains. That It has been brought out once more, well
Illustrated, is something which will give pleasure to thousands who have
long desired an opportunity to read the story again, and to the many who
have tried vainly In these latter days to procure a copy that they might
read It for the first time.
THE PEARL OF ORR'S ISLAND. A story of the Coast of Maine. By
Harriet Beecher Stowe. Cloth, 2mo. Illustrated. Price, $1.oo.
Written prior to 1M2, the "Pearl of Orr's Island" Is ever new: a book
filled with delicate fancies, such as seemingly array themselves anew each
time one reads them.   One sees the "sea like an unbroken mirror all
around the pine-girt, lonely shores of Orr's Island," and straightway
comes "the heavy. hollow moan of the surf on the beach, like the wild
angry howl of some savage animal."
Who can read of the beginning of that sweet life, named Mara, which
came into this world under the very shadow of the Death angel's wings,
without having an intense desire to know how the premature bud blos-
aomed? Again and again one lingers over the descriptions of the chad-
acter of that baby boy Moses, who came through the tempest, amid t-
angry billows, pillowed on his dead mother's breast
There is no more fafthful portrayal of New England life than that
whick Mrs. towe gives in "The Pearl of Orr's Island."
For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the pib
ishers, A. L, BURT COMPANY, 5s-58 Duaoe St., New York.



